                                                                                                         Università Iuav di Venezia

       The Invisible Gem of
Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal

                                             Grenoble (FR)

Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa        Final Thesis of    Ho Trong Nhan - 294042
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot  Master in Architecture    Venice, 24th Oct 2023

                              2022/2023
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                                      PREFACE Introduction

                                      This thesis presents an introduction to the illustration of reflected
                                      sundials in the 17th century,employing a methodology that en-
                                      compasses various layers of information, spanning from historical
                                      insights to astronomical aspects. The magnificent sundial clock at
                                      Lycée Stendhal in Grenoble, which dates from 1673, is the focus of
                                      this inquiry.

                                      MA in Architecture
                                      Thesis program 2023

                                      Acknowledgments
                                      I would like to express my heartfelt appreciation to my parents,
                                      Professor Agostino De Rosa and Professor Alessio Bortot, for their
                                      unwavering support and invaluable guidance throughout the chal-
                                      lenging process of completing my thesis. Their assistance and en-
                                      couragement have been crucial, and I am deeply grateful for their
                                      contributions. I extend my deepest gratitude to every one of them.

                                      Title: The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal,
                                      Grenoble (FR)
                                      Student: Ho Trong Nhan
                                      Student ID: 294042
                                      Supervisor: Professor. Agostino De Rosa
                                      Co-Supervisor: Professor. Alessio Bortot

                                      Università Iuav di Venezia
                                      Santa Croce, 191 Tolentini
                                      30135 Venezia

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                          3.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

              Abstract

    This thesis is an introduction of representation on reflective sundials in
    the 17th century which has multiple layers of information from history to
    astronomy by applying representation methodology. The survey is about
    the magnificent sundial clock located at Lycée Stendhal in Grenoble, dat-
    ing from 1673(1). The sun clock at Grenoble is a testament to the tech-
    nological advances of the 17th century. This clock is built in fresco and
    covers 100m2 of wall and ceiling space(2). It does not require any elec-
    tricity or internet connectivity. Its creator - Jesuit Father Jean Bonfa and
    his student had compressed many data into this fresco, including history,
    mathematics, astronomy, and geography. The construction of sundials,
    particularly reflected ones, was evidently a passion for scholars during
    this time. Therefore, it is difficult for ordinary visitors to comprehend all
    of the information of this piece of art. The purpose of this paper is to pres-
    ent all the information about the building in a visual way so readers can
    get a better understanding of it.
    Three parts of the research will be explored: the first looks at the histor-
    ical value and basic principles of astronomy and sundials. In the second
    part, we apply the representation method to analyze the system behind
    this famous reflection sundials. The third part focuses on the possibility
    of using digital technology to present all the information graphically to
    improve the experience of visitors with this historical staircase. In the
    end, we plan to create a digital tool to teach and present about this room.

    1 Mayall, R. Newton, and Mayall W. Margarett, Sundials: Their Construction and Use,
    Cambridge, USA, ed. Sky Publishing Corporation, 1994.
    2 L'Horloge Solaire DV Lycee Stendhal, 1673, Publication of the Foyer du Lycée Stend-
    hal, 1984

4.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              5.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

             Introduction

"An inch of time on the sundial is worth more than a foot of jade."
                                                                - Confucius

This thesis is an introduction to the representa-       and 18th centuries. At the same time, social life
tion of the reflective sundial in the 17th century -    was developing in Europe. People need to know
using the Horloge Solaire du lycéé Stendhal as an       the exact time at all times. Public buildings,
object for this research. At Stendhal High School,      churches, and townhouses all have mechanical
on the stairs of the main building, there is a mag-     clocks indicating the time on exterior facades. But
nificent gnomonic monument that gives us infor-         at the moment, the mechanical devices are still in
mation about time with several ways to measure          poor performance and need regular adjustment.
time. The school itself has historical values of its    And the sundial became the standard of reference
own. The construction of buildings took place in        for the time believed.
several stages to create what we see today. Lycée
Stendhal was part of the former Collègedes Jé-          This science has been part of university mathe-
suites. It is the oldest lycée in Grenoble.             matics teaching since the 17th century, further
                                                        demonstrating the importance of sundials' re-
The sun clock at Grenoble is a testimony to the         search and production. The Ecole des Beaux-Arts
17th century's technological advances. As men-          program in Paris includes applying descriptive
tioned by Rene R.J. Rohr: "The best known and           geometry to the drawing of sundials. Even so,
often mentioned reflected ceiling sundial was           these graceful devices are slowly disappearing.
painted in 1673 on the walls and ceiling of the
stairwell in an ancient Jesuit convent in Grenoble,     Besides the practical value of the reflective sun-
now used as a college." (1) The reflected ceiling       dial, it was also valuable for theoretical research
sundial is rich in intellectual and historical signif-  and the practice of mathematical theory by schol-
icance. Father Bonfa's work is now in good con-         ars at the time. There are many theories about
dition for its essential parts. It was restored nu-     what sources Father Jean Bonfa was influenced
merous times, including in 1755, 1855, 1900, and        by when creating the sundial that we see today.
1918. However, no specific information indicates        Many people think that these may be the very
which parts were repaired during those resto-           three works that Father Bonfa referred to: Primi-
rations, and there are still small parts that have      tive gnomonic ae catoptric ae, 1635 - treatises and
not been fully restored.                                records of Jesuit Athanasius Kircher; Perspectiva
                                                        honoraria, Rome, 1648 - direct work on Reflective
The art of making sundials flourished in the 17th       sundial by Father Emmanuel Maignan, a famous

6.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                 physicist and mathematician in Rome; Horologium thamanticum duplex,
                 1662 - The Notebook of Jesuit Ignace-Gaston Pardiès. All of them are out-
                 standing scientific treatises on the sundial of the time.

                 In general, Sundials are recognized as artifacts at the intersection of sev-
                 eral sectors, from science to art, allowing the observer multiple degrees of
                 understanding, ranging from practical information on time measurement.
                 It combines logical geometric approaches, aesthetic quality, and philo-
                 sophical reflection. From the above, the art of Gnomonic requires many
                 practical skills to understand the coordination of vast different operations
                 coexists. Creating sundials, mainly reflecting ones, was a passion among
                 scholars of the period. For example, to determine the exact time repre-
                 sented in Horloge Solaire du lycée Stendhal, readers are requested to do a
                 calculation equivalent to a quiz, meaning they must have a comprehensive
                 understanding of numerous scientific disciplines to appreciate the magnif-
                 icence of this piece of art.

                 It caused the current Horloge Solaire du lycée Stendhal issue, which was
                 opened to the public. Despite its small scale, the mechanical system of this
                 seventeenth-century painting is highly sophisticated, requiring numerous
                 levels of knowledge such as history, geography, astronomy, mathematics,
                 and so on. Despite the tour guide's experience and hard work, it is difficult
                 for guests to comprehend all of the information in one go. This location has
                 become less attractive to visitors who wish to visit Grenoble. Additionally,
                 Because of the covid epidemic, visitors are limited in access, likely escalat-
                 ing the problem. This thesis will examine and display every piece of infor-
                 mation about the building using an architectural representation approach
                 to make this sundial easier to understand for an ordinary visitor.

                 To begin with, understanding the historical value of the reflected sundi-
                 al at Stendhal school, this study will discuss the survey and examination
                 of the sundial in Stendhal, Grenoble, the most famous reflecting sundial
                 described in numerous documents on the 17th century's technological ad-
                 vantage. The second section introduces the survey process and the repre-
                 sentation methodology to analyze the system hidden beneath one of the
                 most well-known reflection sundials - Horloge Solaire du lycée Stendhal.
                 The thesis will create a 3D model file of this place from the information and
                 images obtained during the survey. The comparison method between 3d
                 scanning technology and ideal theories will also be applied to increase the
                 accuracy of this digitalization work.

                 By using representation to explain the complex mechanical system be hide
                 this building, the thesis will illustrate the many layers of information that
                 Father Bonfa and his student had compressed into the fresco. This thesis
                 aims to create a 3d model and make it a tool to represent the information
                 and knowledge that has been compressed within this work for hundreds
                 of years. It will be an educational tool to support guiding visitors to make it
                 easier for them to understand the essence hidden within this theological
                 space.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                          7.
Table of Content

                          Chapter 1:                                                               12
                                                                                              15 - 19
                   An Intervention of Sundial: From Gno-                                      20 - 21
                                monic to Catoptric
                                                                                              22 - 27
                            1. A Brief History of Sundial
                            2. An Intervention of Sundial: From Gnomonic to Catoptric         28 - 31

                                     · Sundial Typologies and Classification.
                                     · Examples of Reflective Sundials in The Past.
                            3. The Influence of 17th-Century Treatises on The Design of
                            Grenoble's Sundial
                                     · First Influencer: Athanasius Kircher - The first idea

                                          about catoptric.
                                     · Second Influencer: Emmanuel Maignan
                                     · Third Influencer: Pardiès (Ignace-Gaston) (1636 -

                                          1673).
                            4. Learning from Emanuele Maignan: from Ideal Sphere to
                            Reflected Sundial

                                     · The Legacy of Emanuele Maignan: "Perspectiva
                                          Horaria Sive De Horographia Gnomonica Tum
                                          Theoretica Tum Practica".

                                     · The first lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book:
                                          The concept of the Celestial Sphere .

                                     · The second lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's
                                          book: The projection of A Celestial Sphere.

                                     · The third lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book
                                          The Reflected Celestial Sphere - Catoptric Sphere.

                                     · Maignan's celestial projection technique.
                            5. Case Studies on Notable Reflective Sundial

                                     · Case Study 1: The Reflecting Sundial at Palazzo
                                          Spada, Rome - Emmanuel Maignan (1644).

                                     · Case study 2: The reflecting sundial at The Church
                                          of San Cristo in Brescia, Italy.

The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)
               Chapter 2:

Surveying and Analyzing the Reflective Sundial

           in Stendhal School, Grenoble

1. A History of The Lycée Stendhal (Grenoble,France)

        A History of The Lycée Stendhal in Grenoble                         33 - 35
        The Career of Jesuit Father Jean Bonfa

2. The Reflection Sundial of The Stendhal High School in Grenoble

(France)                                                                    36 - 37
         The Existing Condition of The Reflective Sundial in Grenoble:

3. Methods of Survey and Digital Reconstruction

        · Method of Dimension Measurement

        · Photographing Stairs for 3D Scanning: A Step-by-Step Guide        38 - 43
        · Synthesizing Images into 3D Files: A Process of Transforma-

        tion

4. Unveiling the Fresco's Meaning of Reflective Sundial at Stendhal

School

        · Unveiling the Fresco's Meaning of Reflective Sundial at Stendhal

        School, Grenoble

        HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock)

        CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Calendar of Mary)

        CALENDARVM SOC. IESV. Calendar of the Society of Je-

        sus

        HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM                                44 - 52
        NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New Moon Civil

        Calendar

        Tables of Epactes

        CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar)

        · Translation of Latin Inscriptions

        · Network Lines of Time Systems:

5. Analyzing the Hours System of the Sundial

        · The Signs of The Zodiac - System of Declinations of The Sun

        · French Hours Dials                                                53 - 73
        · Babylonian Hours Dials
        · Italian Hours Dials

        · Twelve Astrological Houses - The Celestial Houses

6. Conclusion: Comparison of the Ideal Sphere Model to the 3D Survey        74 - 75
Model
Reference :

        · Bibliography

        · List of Figures

                                                             Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
                                                                                Università Iuav di Venezia
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

    Chapter 1:

 An Intervention of Sundial:
From Gnomonic to Catoptric

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              11.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    1.

         A Brief History of Sundial

Figure 1.1 Ancient Egyptian    The notion of a sundial has existed for as long as                       Figure 1.4 World's oldest
Obelisks (slender, tapering,   human history (Figure 1.1, 1.2). Gnomonics is the                        known sundial, from Egypt's
four-sided monuments)          term given to it. Its origins may be traced back to                      Valley of the Kings (c. 1500
were built as early as 3500    when the sundial was in its most primitive form.                         BC), used to measure work
BCE. Their moving shadows      The art of Gnomonics may be deduced from the                             hours. (Photo courtesy of
formed a kind of sundial,      natural composition of a mountain or a slope.                            University of Basel)
enabling people to partition   Observing how an object's shadow changes over
the day into morning and af-   the day and year led to the discovery that the Sun                       Figure 1.5 Hemispherical
ternoon. (Photo courtesy of    might be used as a timekeeper.                                           Greek sundial from Ai Kha-
ohhenry415 - Obelisk)                                                                                   noum, Afghanistan, 3rd-2nd
                               Gnomonic comes from the Latin gnomonica                                  century BCE.
Figure 1.2 Stonehenge was      (ars), which is taken from the Greek 
constructed from around        (), gnomnik temkhn, "art of sundial build-                               Figure 1.6 Athens' Tower of
3000 BC to 2000 BC in          ing," but also "art of knowledge" 1; therefore, gno-                     the Winds (1st century BC).
Wiltshire, England, many       mon (gnomon), is the stick that casts shadows.                           A sundial may be seen on
believe that they actually     The term gnomon has two meanings in terms of                             each side of this octagonal
served as a giant sundial.     knowledge: it describes what produces under-                             tower. The hour lines can
(Photo courtesy of Credit:     standing or is a holder of knowledge who un-                             still be seen. However, they
David Goddard/Getty Imag-      derstands how to judge. It is the meeting point                          are not apparent in this shot.
es)                            of several scientific disciplines. The sundial is a                      (Photo courtesy of COR-
                               combination of many fields, from science to art.                         BIS/S.Vannini)
Figure 1.3 The most primitive  It offers viewers different reading levels, from
form of Gnomonic, Hand-        practical information on time measurement to
sketch by Ho Trong Nhan        indepth astronomy analysis. The harmony be-
                               tween geometric methodologies and their un-
12.                            deniable aesthetic value reflects the philosophy
                               contained in these devices. In this section, we
                               will investigate the history of the sundial, from
                               the ancient Gnomonic sundial discovered to the
                               precision-machined catoptric sundial that rep-
                               resents the growth of the Age of Enlightenment.

                               1. Andrews, Ethan Allen, and Charlton Thomas Lewis. A Latin dic-
                                    tionary founded on An-drews' edition of Freund's Latin dictionary.
                                    Clarendon Press, 1896.

                               2. Savoie Denis. Sundials: Design Construction and Use. Springer;
                                    Published in Associa-tion with Praxis 2009, p.25 -27.

                               3. Chaldea was a small country that existed between the late
                                    10th or early 9th and mid-6th centuries BC, after which the
                                    country and its people were absorbed and assimilat-ed into
                                    the indigenous population of Babylonia.

                               4. Rochberg-Halton, F. "Babylonian Seasonal Hours." Centaurus
                                    32, no. 2 (July 1989), p. 146-70.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

The First Gnomons and the Development of Sundial.                                    Figure 1.7 A dial with a
                                                                                     scaphe and an eyelet (Lou-
Humans had been passively watching the cycle of sunlight for millennia before        vre Museum, 1st-2nd centu-
Gnomonics was regarded seriously as an interdisciplinary science that incorpo-       ry AD). With this hemispher-
rated geometry, trigonometry, and astronomy. He has learned to concentrate           ical display, the light point
more closely on the phenomena of light and shadow and, as a result, schedules        represents the time and
his actions in harmony with the cycle of the day and the astronomical seasons.       seasons. (Photo courtesy of
In its most primitive form, a sundial is a composition of a table with hour lines    RMN/H.Lewandowski)
imprinted on it and a style that casts a shadow on the table (Figure 1.3). The time
is shown by the shadow moving over the hour lines. The original sundial might        Figure 1.8 A Graeco-Roman
have been a gnomon, a stick put vertically in the ground, but we have yet to         dial (Timgad, Algeria). The
learn when it was used or which society invented it. It was probably seen as an      style was originally located
astronomical instrument rather than as a timepiece.                                  at the junction of the hour
                                                                                     lines. The temporal hours
Sundial-making techniques have evolved in many forms since Ancient Egypt             and season dates were rep-
(Figure 1.4), such as conical sundials, spherical sundials, and so on. The old       resented by the tip of the
sundials all had one thing in common: they showed the hours in varied inter-         shadow. (Photo courtesy of
vals, with just the tip of the shadow indicating the time. Hundreds of ancient       N. Marquet)
sundials. Some of the ancient sundial was Greek geographical origin (Figure
1.5), have been uncovered during archeological excavations around the Med-           Figure 1.9 An Arab Islamic
iterranean. With its eight sundials, the Tower of Wind at Agora in Athens is a       sundial in the Museum of
notable example (Figure 1.6). About 50 BC, Andronicus of Cyrrhus developed           Islamic Art in Cairo, Egypt.
this kind of sundial. Figures 1.7 and 1.8 show further example of ancient sun-       This magnificent vertical
dials. During the Roman invasion, sundials were brought into Italy. Emperor          sundial was designed to de-
Augustus constructed a famous sundial on Rome's Campus Martius (Field of             termine the hours of Islamic
Mars) to celebrate his triumph in Egypt. His monument tower was almost 22            prayers. (Photo courtesy of
meters high, brought from Heliopolis to Rome in 10 BC. The memorial's top is         A. du Boistesselin)
a ball meant to combat the semi-dark effects. According to various specialists,
the lack of accuracy of most sundials was also observed during this period.2 In
ancient Greece, using a sundial was unusual. Only prosperous cities in ancient
Greece and Rome had sundials that displayed the time: temporal (i.e., irreg-
ular) hours. However, the ancient gnomonic heritage continues in Arab cul-
ture, strengthened by fundamental mathematical principles. Eventually, the
ancient Egyptian and Chaldean civilizations3 developed astronomical studies
to precisely orient massive structures, such as the Pyramids and temples, to
measure time or record seasonal events through shadows (Figure 1.9). These
also supported the development of sundial science.

The concept of splitting the day into 24 hours came from Egypt. Regardless of
the season, the day was divided into 12 equal portions. In addition, the night
was split into 12 similar pieces, a concept that originated in Egypt to simplify
nighttime prayer. This is the concept development 24 hours a day. We have
two parallel time systems for these phenomena: Babylonian hours from sun-
rise onward, and Italic hours from sunset, with variations in other nations 4. In
the following chapter, we will discover and apply those time systems as we
examine the reflecting sundial at Grenoble. Sundials gradually lost their value
for measuring time due to various reasons during the last century, becoming
more of an aesthetic instrument.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                             13.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Figure 1.10 Ars Magna Lucis      The Golden Period of Sundials, Followed by the 17th Century Enlighten-
et Umbrae is a 1646 work by      ment.
the Jesuit scholar Athanasius
Kircher.                         Sundial science has a long and fascinating history with many ups and downs.
                                 It is said that the field genuinely blossomed during the European Enlighten-
Figure 1.11 A vertical sundial   ment's scientific and technological advances. This was a time when intellectu-
in the courtyard of the Hô-      als were eager to push the limits of knowledge and investigate new research
tel des Invalides in Paris. The  fields. The German scholar Athanasius Kircher wrote " Ars Magna Lucis et
black, unbroken hour lines in-   Umbrae" in the mid-1600s, describing Sundial as the widely practiced noble
dicate true solar time, and the  art of light and shadow in all kinds of civilizations (Figure 1.10). Gnomonics's
red dotted lines indicate the    popularity opened up new opportunities for experimentation and research.
Babylonian hour (i.e., the time  Kircher was significantly involved in these endeavors, and his work contribut-
elapsed since sunrise). (Photo   ed to establishing Gnomonics as a significant study. Gnomonics was not only
courtesy of SAF/R.Sagot)         scientifically interesting, but it was also aesthetically attractive. As a result, it
                                 became a popular way for the wealthy aristocracy to decorate the exteriors of
                                 significant buildings (Figure 1.11). Gnomonics was strongly associated with
                                 mathematics and astronomy during the Enlightenment's golden period. This
                                 resulted in a significant amount of scientific study on the subject and sever-
                                 al notable discoveries. Gnomonics, sadly, went out of popularity again in the
                                 nineteenth century. Mechanical and physics advancements made it appear
                                 less relevant than other scientific areas.

                                 After a time of mystery, people eventually acknowledged the importance of
                                 Gnomonics in the 1980s due to the promotional activities of various Gnomon-
                                 ics groups. Currently, there is a rising awareness of Gnomonics and its histor-
                                 ical significance. Individuals are recording and conserving Gnomonic history
                                 once more, and there is increased interest in comprehending the ideas under-
                                 lying this exciting and vital profession. Gnomonics will continue to be a topic
                                 of considerable interest and relevance for future generations.

Figure 1.13 The principle
of the sundial. The merid-
ians 15 degrees apart in
the equatorial plane can be
projected onto variably in-
clined planes, in the form
of straight lines known as
hour lines, Savoie Denis.
Sundials: Design Construc-
tion and Use. Springer; Pub-
lished in Association with
Praxis 2009, p.39.

14.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                    2.

        An Intervention of Sundial:
       From Gnomonic to Catoptric

It is necessary first to understand sundial's funda-    The Sundial's General Concept.
mental concepts. This understanding is a founda-
tion for future investigation and experimentation       The Sundial's general principle is based on the Sun's
with various sundial types. This section is essential   rays casting a shadow on a specified surface, indi-
because it thoroughly explains the basic concepts       cating the time of day. A sundial contains a dial ta-
of sundial construction and design and introduces       ble (or dial plate) containing a set of hour lines and
readers to the numerous varieties of sundials. The      a style, the shadow that is cast onto the dial table.
broad types of sundials are distinguished by their      The table may be horizontal, vertical, or inclined
building requirements: column, cylinder, polyhe-        at an intermediate angle. The dial face results from
dral, book, cup, equinoctial (where the gnomon is       projecting the Celestial Sphere onto a plane sur-
parallel to the earth's axis, and the dial is compara-  face (Figure 1.12). As a result, the projections of the
ble to the plane of the equator), and other shapes      meridians upon the ground will be in the form of
and sizes are available.                                straight lines - the hour lines of the dial. The Equa-
                                                        tor will also be projected as a straight line, known

Figure 1.12 The projection of Ce-                       15.
lestial Sphere onto a plane. (Pho-
to courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

as the equinoctial line, and the two Tropics will be projected in     Figure 1.14 Diagram of the celestial sphere.
the form of hyperbolae: the diurnal arcs. Because the Sun trav-       "Mathematical Techniques: The Celestial
els through 360 degrees in 24 hours, the meridians are 15 de-         Sphere." Starry Messenger: The Celestial
grees apart on the sphere (Figure 1.13). However, it will be seen     Sphere, www.sites.hps.cam.ac.uk/starry/ar-
that their projections upon the ground are no longer 15 degrees       millmaths.html. Accessed 17 May 2023.
apart. The celestial sphere is an imaginary sphere surrounding
the Earth, where all celestial objects appear to be (Figure 1.14).
The angle between the hour markers will vary significantly de-
pending on whether the meridian is projected onto a horizontal,
vertical, or inclined plane (Figure 1.15). These timelines intersect
at a point (as projected onto the earth). This is the intersection
of the Sphere's axis with the ground. We have created a horizon-
tal sundial with hour markers, day arcs, and the polar style axis
(Figure 1.16). How accurate can we expect a sundial to be? The
most we can hope for is an accurate one-minute readout if it is
appropriately positioned. On the other hand, the sundial is not
intended to indicate a precise time to the second. Penumbral ef-
fects 5, variances in the temporal equation, and refraction are all
factors that work against an accurate reading.

Sundial Typologies and Classification.                                Figure 1.15 The principle of the sundial. The
                                                                      meridians are projected onto the horizontal
Sundials have been used to track the sun's movement and tell          sundial from the hour lines, and the parallels
time for centuries, and they have been a fascinating area of study    from the diurnal arcs. Sundials: Design Con-
for scientists and enthusiasts alike. Sundials have evolved, each     struction and Use. Springer; Published in As-
with its own set of design and construction requirements. As a        sociation with Praxis 2009, p.38.
result, numerous sundial typologies and classifications have de-
veloped over time. To accurately read the time, the clock needed      Figure 1.17 Mondovie's falling vertical sundi-
to be oriented to the north, accomplished with a compass.             al (Italy). The dial table is oriented vertically.
                                                                      The pattern of hour lines and the position of
Vertical Sundial (Figure 1.17):                                       the style depend on the orientation of the dial.
                                                                      (Photo courtesy of S.Gregori)
Vertical sundials are the most common type, and they can be
found on the walls of older homes, as well as historic buildings,
churches, and monuments. The gnomon is positioned on the
plane of the clock in the direction of the celestial axis, and its
center point represents the center of the celestial sphere.

Equinoctial Ring Sundial (Figure 1.18):

A meridian ring contains: a latitude scale on one side, on the
other side are hour scales, and the bridge has date scales. We can
see the Sun's light displays the time by letting it pass through a
hole at the center and reaching the opposite of the hour ring. It
tells the true solar time anywhere in the world.

Scaphe Sundial - Cup Sundial (Figure 1.19):

This device, known as a "Scaphea," dates back to the Babylonians
and is one of the oldest sundial devices. It is made by projecting
the Hour lines onto a concave hemispherical surface represent-
ing the reverse of the celestial sphere. The gnomon is fixed to the
southern side.

16.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Cylindrical Sundial - Altitude Sundials (Figure 1.20):                              Figure 1.16 A horizontal sun-
                                                                                    dial of Grenoble. (Photo cour-
Cylindrical sundials are unique and fun devices. They determine the solar time      tesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
by measuring the Sun's elevation above the horizon. The hour lines of this
clock, which has been in use in the Christian West since the 10th century, are      Figure 1.18 A ring watches.
painted on the surface of a vertical cylinder. The horizontal gnomon is linked      The suspension points of the
to the cylinder's spinning head and may be positioned on the date and time          dynamic clock with the local
being read. Shepherd's Cylinder Dial is a well-known example of this type of        latitude, 2011, is visible on
sundial. This is a handheld instrument often used by herders in the past.           the right of the wider ring.
                                                                                    (Photo courtesy of Whipple
The Analemmatic Sundial (Figure 1.21):                                              Museum)

The analemmatic sundial differs from those previously described primarily           Figure 1.19 Bowl of Ahaz re-
because of the non-gnomonic projection technique used to produce it. An-            fracting scaphe sundial, by
alemmatic sundials are horizontal sundials with a vertical gnomon and hour          Georg Hartman, Nuremberg,
markers positioned in an elliptical pattern. The gnomon is not fixed and must       c. 1525-1564 - Putnam Gal-
change position daily to accurately indicate the time of day. This sundial          lery (Photo courtesy of Har-
works from sunrise to sunset or up to 20 hours. The style is a movable vertical     vard University)
gnomon whose location is aligned with the local meridian.
                                                                                    Figure 1.20 Cylindrical sun-
Horizontal Sundial (Figure 1.22):                                                   dial, 1548. (Photo courtesy of
                                                                                    Kunsthistorisches Museum
Because it can tell the time at any time, it is the most popular type of sundial.   Vienna )
It may be based on an equatorial dial or created with the help of a bit of trig-
onometry and a pocket calculator. It is simple to install in an open area and
works from sunrise to sunset all year. The horizontal sundial comprises a hor-
izontal table with hour lines marked on it and a style that points to the North
Celestial Pole and casts a shadow on it. When the shadow lies upon one of the
lines, it indicates that hour in solar time.

Sundial In the Camera Obscura (Figure 1.23):

Meridian lines, also known as "camera obscura sundials," are an indoor solar
calendar that only works when the sun is in the south at noon each day, trans-
forming it into a perpetual calendar that indicates the date rather than the
time. Meridian lines are constructed from marble, brass, or bronze strips en-
graved with calendrical, astrological, or geographic data and symbols. These
can be mounted horizontally (on the ground) or vertically (on a wall). An ex-
ample of this sundial is Camera Obscura Sundial at Cava de' Tirreni, designed
by Bovi. Another ancient meridian line no longer functioning can be found in
the monastery of Santa Maria degli Angeli in Pizzofalcone, Naples.

Reflecting (or Catoptric) Dial (Figure 1.24):

The sundial is based on the rules of light-ray reflection. The hour line pattern
is reversed from typical sundials, allowing the sunbeams' reflection angles to
diverge from the surface of a tiny mirror that is attached to a surface, such as a
window sill. Athanasius Kircher described the reflecting dial in the Ars magna
lucis et Umbrae (Rome, 1646) (Figure 1.25). We'll go further into these sundials
and how they were made by analyzing the catoptric dial that is developed by
Father Jean Bonfa in Grenoble, France.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                            Figure 1.21 Analemmatic
                                                                                    sundial Herkenrode Design
                                                                                    Willy Leenders.

                                                                                          17.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Figure 1.22 A horizontal sundial at Vaire in            Examples of Reflective Sundials in The Past
the Vendee. The style is in the form of a trian-
gle. (Photo courtesy of SAF/R.Sagot)                    The reflected sundial is a unique sundial that indicates the time
                                                        by reflection principle. This topic was taught in universities and
                                                        reached a high level of accuracy by the 17th century. The list of
                                                        'known reflected ceiling dials is relatively tiny. Indeed, these were
                                                        often too mathematical for the average reader to understand.
                                                        Reflected ceiling dials were generally built for entertainment
                                                        or elegance, if not outright boasting, as in the case of the most
                                                        complicated sundial in the Palazzo Spada in Rome, which will be
                                                        studied later. Figure 1.26, taken from the Frenchman Antonine
                                                        Emmanuel Maignan's Prospectiva Horaria ..., published in Rome
                                                        in 1648, shows the complexity of the science involved. In France
                                                        and Italy, there are several reflecting sundials that show display
                                                        their aesthetic value and practicality. Let's explore some of these
                                                        examples in more detail.

Figure 1.23 Rocco Bovi's camera obscura                 1. The reflective sundial in an ancient Jesuit convent in Greno-
sundial (1771-1772) in the Carthusian mon-              ble, France:
astery of San Martino, Naples. (Photo courte-
sy of Alessandra Pagliano)                              The most well-known and frequently discussed reflected ceiling
                                                        sundial 6 was painted in 1673 on the walls and ceiling of a stair-
Figure 1.24 Grenoble. Jesuit College (current           way in a historical Jesuit convent in Grenoble, which is today used
Stendhal International High School). 2 ceil-            as a college (Lycee Stendhal, Figure 1.27). This old sundial may be
ings and 4 walls in the central staircase. Jean         remarkably accurate. Furthermore, builders were sometimes re-
Bonfa, Jesuit. 1638-1724. (Photo courtesy of            quested to make unique artistic creations. It was created by the
Ho Trong Nhan)                                          Jesuit Bonfa, born in Nimes and taught theology and mathemat-
                                                        ics at Avignon, where he may have known Kircher. This reflective
Figure 1.25 The fantastic reflected dial in the en-     sundial will be discussed in more detail in a later chapter.
graving of Kircher's book. All the elements of the
room are disposed in symmetry with regard to            2. The reflective sundial in the village of Saint-Antoine-en-Vi-
the meridian plane.                                     enne (or en-Dauphine), France:
Figure 1.26 The theory of the reflected ceiling
dial according to Maignan.                              Saint-Antoine-en-Vienne (or en-Dauphine) is located 40 kilome-
                                                        ters west of Grenoble. It has a beautiful and historic basilica. This
18.                                                     basilica not only has a gorgeous and quite fabulous exterior, but
                                                        it is also the remains of a historic monastery that had belonged
                                                        to the Antonines for seven centuries. It was constructed to pro-
                                                        vide treatment for the victims of the terrible St. Antony's Fire (Er-
                                                        gotism). Antonines must always be alert, regardless of whether
                                                        it is day or night, rain or sun. This is why sundials were invented,
                                                        and King Charles V also ordered a mechanical clock for this place.

                                                        The whole design has 27 steps and covers approximately 25
                                                        square meters. The sundial was painted with colored lines black,
                                                        red, and yellow, indicating Normal, Italic, and Babylonian hours,
                                                        such as in Grenoble (Figure 1.28). This might imply that Bonfa
                                                        created the two. However, no information on the dial's origin is
                                                        available. The sundial is set in the spiraling stairs of a hexago-
                                                        nal tower built against the steeple. Turning left, the stairs receive
                                                        sunlight through several thin vertical slits or loopholes in the
                                                        wall. As the sun moved during the day, a beam of light entered
                                                        the apertures in succession and was reflected on the inner walls,
                                                        steps, and central column of the spiral staircase.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Figure 1.27 The disposition of        3. The reflective sundial in the Chiesa Trinita dei        Figure 1.31 Sebastian Munster,
the walls and ceilings bearing        Monti, Rome, Italy:                                        Compositio Horologiorum
Father Bonfa's reflected dial in                                                                 in Plano, Muro, Truncis, Anu-
Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of          In Rome, central Italy, the Santissima Trinità dei         lo, Concavo, Cylindro, & Varijs
Ho Trong Nhan)                        Monti church - often referred to simply as the             Quadrantibus. Cum signorum
                                      Trinità dei Monti - is a Roman Catholic. The mon-          zodiaci et diversarum horarum
Figure 1.28 Saint-Antoine-en-         astery was constructed in the 17th century for             inscriptionibus, Basilea, 1531.
Vienne. The southwest reflect-        the monks of the Minim order, whom St. Francis
ed dial drawn on the spiral           of Paola founded. The monastery complex was                Figure 1.32 Oronce Finé, Pro-
staircase. (Photo courtesy of         renowned for its exquisite pharmaceuticals, well-          tomathesis, Paris, 1532.
Paul Gagnaire)                        stocked library, and collection of priceless art-
                                      works.                                                     Figure 1.33 Athanasius Kircher
Figure 1.29 Trinita dei Monti,                                                                   (2 May 1602 - 27 November
Rome. The Gallery of the Astro-       At this place, a sundial was designed by Emman-            1680)[1] was a German Jesu-
labe. The reflecting mirror is on     uel Maignan, a Toulouse native who split his time          it scholar and polymath who
the sill below the twin shutters.     between Avignon and Rome. In 1637, he used a               published around 40 major
(Photo courtesy of Paul Gag-          hallway above the convent cloister to design a re-         works of comparative religion,
naire)                                flective ceiling dial of a specific type that is still in  geology, and medicine.
                                      excellent shape. The ceiling and walls are covered
Figure 1.30 The Reflection Sun-       in a colored and complicated network (Figure                     19.
dial at Palazzo Spada in Rome         1.29). Father Jean-Framois Niceron (1613-1646),
                                      a great student of Maignan, became an enthusi-
Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              ast of this science. He published Thaumaturgus
                                      Opticus 7, a remarkable Latin book investigating
                                      reflective sundials.

                                      4. The reflective sundial in Palazzo Spada, Rome,
                                      Italy:

                                      Maignan created another unique Reflective dial
                                      in 1644 at Capo de Ferro in Palazzo Spada. It is
                                      one of the most detailed sundials ever designed
                                      due to its diversity and system complexity. The
                                      palace was initially owned by Cardinal Spada, a
                                      well-known Maecenas, who requested Maignan
                                      to design a most comprehensive and worldwide
                                      sundial (Figure 1.30). The ceiling between this
                                      wall and the gallery vault has a cylindrical pro-
                                      file. The intersection of the two differently arched
                                      surfaces forms a continuous curve displaying
                                      the dial lines. In the poorly lighted room, it can
                                      only be arduous to distinguish from each other
                                      the lines of local time, Italic, Babylonian and Bib-
                                      lical hours, the zodiac and lines of extreme moon
                                      declination (±28.5°), the Domus coelestis, azi-
                                      muths, almucantars, and hyperbolas for the days
                                      of an even number of daylight hours. My list only
                                      amounts to four dials, but all are inside buildings
                                      and not visible from the streets. There are thou-
                                      sands of cities and villages in Europe - how many
                                      more of these dials may be awaiting discovery?
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    3.

 The Influence of 17th-Century Treatises
   on The Design of Grenoble's Sundial

Figure 1.34 Emmanuel Maig-      Gnomonics steadily gained popularity in the 1500s due to the rising utilization
nan, Perspectiva horaria sive   of sundials and hourglasses, as well as the significant growth of mathematical
de horographia gnomonica        and astronomical sciences at the time 8. Many notable scientific treatises were
tum theoretica tum practica,    published at the same time, including "Compositio horologiorum" by Sebastian
Rome, 1648.                     Munster (Basilea, 1531) and "Protomathesis" by Oronce Finé (Paris, 1532) (Fig-
                                ure 1.31, 1.32). Gnomonics became a practical topic for geometric theorical re-
Figure 1.35 Ignace-Gaston Par-  search and astronomical discoveries.
diès, Deux machines propres à   Due to the discoveries and advancements in the study of reflection theory in
faire les quadrans, 1687        geometry, reflective sundials were born as a unique branch of Gnomonic's re-
                                search. It is an extraordinary category in Gnomonics since it functions by the
Figure 1.36 Here is an Image    reflection of the sun's rays on mirrors. In the 16th century, it was discovered that
from page.582 in Arts Magna     the technique of manufacturing sundials could also be extended to indoor ar-
Lucis and Umbras.               eas where the sun does not shine directly, such as inner chambers, palaces, ceil-
                                ings and domes of galleries, and so on. Back to the subject of this thesis - the
                                Reflective sundial at Stendhal High School, Grenoble. Let's explore the question:
                                in the many studies of Reflective sundials at the time, which research inspired
                                Father Bonfa during the creation of this splendid Grenoble timepiece?
                                It is known that Bonfa's work was designed in 1673. During this period, in the
                                great library of the city of Grenoble circulating, three treatises on Reflective
                                sundials: Primitiae gnomonicae catoptricae, 1635 - treatises and records of Je-
                                suit Athanasius Kircher (Figure 1.33); Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia
                                gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome, 1648 - direct work on Reflec-
                                tive sundial by Father Emmanuel Maignan, a famous physicist, and mathema-
                                tician in Rome. (Figure 1.34); Deux machines propres à faire les quadrans - The
                                Notebook of Jesuit Ignace-Gaston Pardiès. (Figure 1.35). These are maybe the
                                three works that influenced Father Bonfa. We will briefly cover each scholar
                                and their essential treatises to show the influence they have had on this par-
                                ticular discipline.
                                First Influencer: Athanasius Kircher - The first idea about catoptric.
                                Athanasius Kircher (1602 - 1680) 9 was a German Jesuit scholar and polymath
                                who published over 40 essential works in comparative religion, geology, and
                                medicine. Athanasius Kircher mostly gathered his ideas and expertise on
                                Gnomonics in two published works, the Primitiae Gnomonicae Catoptricae
                                (Avignon, 1635) and the Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae (Rome, 1646). Kircher is
                                considered the pioneer of the Reflective sundial 10. He mentioned the concept
                                of the Reflective sundial in his research paper in the 17th century. In his 1646
                                work "Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae," Kircher created the phrase "Actinobolis-
                                mus," or "ray throwing." (Figure 1.36). Begin with an introduction to the rules
                                of reflection of flat and curved mirrors, followed by a description of how to
                                build a Reflective sundial. Kirchner includes "Theorems," or reflection laws,
                                such as the angle of incidence and inclination of reflection. The concept is
                                that a reflected picture is inverted left for right and upside down. The idea

20.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

of Kircher about sundials is the combination of essential scientific disciplines    Figure 1.37 Catoptric sundial,
such as perspective, gnomonics, geography, optics, conic sections, and geom-        Palazzo Spada in Rome.
etry. Because of Kircher's foundation study, Father Bonfa may have learned a
lot about the theory of Reflective Sundials.                                        Figure 1.38 Illustrations of Two
Second Influencer: Emmanuel Maignan                                                 machines suitable for making
On July 17, 1601, Emmanuel Maignan, a French mathematician, and priest, was         quadrans, R.P. Ignace Gaston
born. Maignan was a native of Toulouse in southern France and had joined the        Pardies.
Order of Minims, a Catholic organization formed in the 15th century by Fran-
cis of Paola. Maignan is a fantastic self-taught creator. He learned the mathe-     Figure 1.39 Illustrations of this
matical sciences on his own. Maignan spent 14 years in the order's convent of       application, R.P. Ignace Gaston
Santissima Trinità dei Monti in Rome11, where he published an excellent trea-       Pardies.
tise on sundials that demonstrated how to create a standard indoor sundial
but also how to project them onto the ceilings of domed churches and the            Figure 1.40 Emmanuel Maig-
walls of rectories.                                                                 nan, Perspectiva Horaria Sive
He wrote "Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoret-            De Horographia Gnomonica
ica tum practica" in 1648, Rome. While supposedly about sundials, Emanuele          Tum Theoretica Tum Practica,
Maignan's Perspectiva Horologia is also a complete treatise on the fundamental      Rome, 1648, p. 362.
mathematics of projected geometry, perspective, and optics, including an en-
tire section on the design and cutting of optical lenses. Emmanuel Maignan's
outstanding sundial includes the Reflective Sundial at Trinità de' Monti and Pala-
zzo Spada (Figure 1.37). In contrast to Kircher's book, Maignan's work includes
extensive pictures of the examinations. We can imagine and reproduce them
because there is so much detail. Perhaps this is also the motivating cause behind
the development of the Reflective sundial at Stendhal High School in Grenoble.
Third Influencer: Pardiès (Ignace-Gaston) (1636 - 1673)
Ignace-Gaston Pardies was a French Jesuit priest and mechanic. He was born
on September 5, 1636, in Pau (France) and died on April 21, 1674, in Paris. He
is the author of several physics, geometry, and astronomy works. He was also
a pioneer in the wave theory of light. He published " Deux machines propres à
faire les quadrans" in 1687, Paris. In chapter VI, titled " Horologium reflexiones
incubiculo facere" (Figure 1.38) or "Making a reflection clock in a room," we can
read as follows: "The most beautiful quadrans are mirror images. A small mir-
ror is placed over the window, which receives sunlight and reflects a ray of it
into the room so that this ray changes position as the sun advances. Mark all
painted hours in the chamber ...". Many 16th and 17th-century scholars tried to
develop new techniques that simplified the design of sundials using geometric
or computational methodologies (Figure 1.39). Ignace-Gaston Pardies is no dif-
ferent. He designed and explained an instrument that uses a mirror's reflection
to produce his sundial. Although neither as theoretical as Kircher's works nor as
applied to high architectural space as Maignan's, Gaston Pardies' machine is a
one-of-a-kind reference for anyone wishing to use the law of reflection for the
development of a sundial.
Because of the practical aspect of Emmanuel Maignan's "Perspectiva horaria
sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica," it is assumed
that Father Bonfa used the ideal sphere theory discussed in this work to create
his masterpiece Reflective Sundial at Stendhal High School in Grenoble. We'll
go further into this work and try to model an ideal sphere. From there, you
may replicate Father Bonfa's drawings in the Reflective sundial at Stendhal
High School, Grenoble.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                            21.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    4.

Learning from Emanuele Maignan: from
     Ideal Sphere to Reflected Sundial

Figure 1.41 Dedicated to Ber-  The Legacy of Emanuele Maignan: "Perspectiva Horaria Sive De Horographia
nardino Spada, Emmanuel        Gnomonica Tum Theoretica Tum Practica"
Maignan, Perspectiva Horaria   Reflective sundials differ from other sundials in that they use reflection and pro-
Sive De Horographia Gno-       jection to display precise time information onto the complex surfaces of interior
monica Tum Theoretica Tum      space. To understand this particular field, we must mention the treatise entitled:
Practica, Rome, 1648.          "Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practi-
                               ca" by Emanuele Maignan. Maignan wrote this book in 1648 after years of devel-
Figure 1.42 Emmanuel Maig-     opment and practice in this unique sundial. It used several of the most recently
nan, Perspectiva Horaria Sive  discovered approaches in mathematics (trigonometry and geometry) and the
De Horographia Gnomonica       newest research in the solar system of this time. The literary documents include
Tum Theoretica Tum Practica,   a handwritten in Latin by the monk Emmanuel Maignan, where 21 scientific ex-
Rome, 1648, p. 466.            perimental exercises are described and conceived to decorate the villas.12
                               Besides that, Maignan used his personal research approach in this book - the
22.                            using an Ideal Celestial Sphere's projection which he called Catoptrics Sphere
                               (Figure 1.40). This approach included investigations and experiments based
                               on Alahzen and Vitellione's concepts and theoretical perspectives.13 Maignan
                               described research studies on making a reflective sundial in an interior envi-
                               ronment in his unique works. Throughout the book, with the typical geomet-
                               rical approach of that time, Maignan represented investigations on optics,
                               Gnomonics, void existence, acoustics, astronomy, etc. This book was a compre-
                               hensive guide to Gnomonics, the science of sundials, and contained theoretical
                               and practical information on constructing and using sundials. The book is an
                               outstanding scholarly effort that contributed to seventeenth-century science.
                               There are two remarkable things about the book: first, Perspectiva Horaria has
                               only one edition in Rome, 1648, second, it is the only publication on gnomonic
                               that is highly applicable among others listed similarly.14 Maignan's legacy in the
                               field of horology continues to be felt today, as his work laid the foundation for
                               the development of more accurate timekeeping devices in the centuries that
                               followed. Let us explore this study and apply its principles to examine the Re-
                               flective sundial at Stendhal High School in Grenoble.

                               Summary of Emanuele Maignan's "Perspectiva Horaria":
                               It is hard to summarize Maignan's book since it is overflowing with gnomonic
                               applicability experiments that would take many pages to describe. As a result,
                               the attempts here will be confined to a simple description of the subject mat-
                               ter consistent with what is evident from the text and pictures, hoping to see
                               a greater depth of the content. Cardinal Bernardino Spada's contributions are
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

highlighted on the first page of the publication (Figure 1.41). It      Figure 1.43 The Celestial Sphere, Savoie Denis.
is known that, as a result of this enormous support, the author         Sundials: Design Construction and Use. Praxis
could put his experiments into reality - the sundial at Palazzo         2009, http://site.ebrary.com/id/10308909 Ac-
Spada - and publish all of his research. The book also includes         cessed 15 May 2023.
a summary of Gnomonics, titled "Solaria Gnomonica Horologia
Omnium Generum ordinabus." It gathered different types of sun-
dials during this period. After mentioning Cardinal Bernardino's
contributions, a twenty-page table of contents of topics and lists
of inscriptions is followed. Philip Gagliard exquisitely and won-
derfully carves these inscriptions.
This book is organized into four documents containing dozens of
propositions and implications: The first book explains the basic
concepts and theories of classical science; The second book de-
scribes how to practice and illustrates sundials in an easy-to-un-
derstand manner based on the concepts covered in the theo-
ry part of the first book; Catoptrice Horaria is mentioned in the
third book, in this section on the theory of gnomonic catoptrics,
and about the projection of the celestial Sphere onto any sur-
face by using mirror reflections in different shapes, such as con-
cave, spherical, parabolic, convex, cylindrical, and so on; Dioptrice
Horaria is referenced in the fourth book; this book begins with the
basic principles of refraction, its causes, and measurements and
progresses to the theory of the refracting telescope - Horograph-
ia dioptrico gnomonica (Figure 1.42). This section also discusses
optical equipment that has telescopic uses. Through Emanuele
Maignan's legacy, we can identify three profound ideas: the con-
cept of a Celestial Sphere, the projection of a Celestial Sphere, and
the Reflected Celestial Sphere - a Catoptric Sphere. In the next sec-
tion, we will briefly review them to get a broad sense of Maignan.

The first lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book: The concept of           Figure 1.44 The local Celestial Sphere. The Ce-
the Celestial Sphere                                                    lestial Sphere is referred to when discussing ap-
Comprehension of Maignan's proposal's workings requires a lit-          parent annual motions, while the local Celestial
tle consideration of astronomy: The Celestial Sphere. The celestial     Sphere is used for apparent diurnal and noctur-
Sphere is an imaginary sphere that surrounds the Earth and con-         nal paths, Savoie Denis. Sundials: Design Con-
tains all celestial objects. Our planet seems static to an observer on  struction and Use. Praxis 2009, http://site.ebrary.
the Earth's surface, while the spherical dome of the sky appears to     com/id/10308909 Accessed 15 May 2023.
move around it. It is an essential concept for astronomers and nav-
igators because it lets them quickly indicate the locations of stars,
planets, and other Celestial bodies. Observation of the night sky
will show that the stars seem to travel from east to west around an
imaginary axis that encounters the inner surface of the Celestial
Sphere close to the Pole Star (Figure 1.43). The imaginary axis is
the Earth's rotational axis, passing through the Celestial Sphere at
two opposite points, the North and South Celestial Pole. By analo-
gy with the Earth, we also define a Celestial Equator. We get the lo-
cal observer's Celestial Sphere by correlating the Celestial Sphere
with the observer's latitude, which is the Sphere that Maignan
used to build the reflected sundial. We can define a local Celestial
Sphere at any point on the Earth's surface (Figure 1.44).

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                23.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

A general Celestial Sphere contains the following features:

A Center Repre-    Since the radius of the Earth is negligible compared with the distance        Figure 1.45 Emmanuel Maig-
senting the Earth  to the heavenly bodies, including the Sun, we can consider the Earth to       nan, Perspectiva horaria sive de
Pole Star Axis.    lie precisely at the center of this Sphere.                                   horographia gnomonica tum
                                                                                                 theoretica tum practica, Rome,
Celestial Equator  The Sphere will revolve around an imaginary axis that heads close to          1648, p. 46,58.
                   the Pole Star (the imaginary axis passing through the North and South
Horizon.           Celestial Pole).                                                              Figure 1.47 Emmanuel Maig-
The Zenith                                                                                       nan, Perspectiva horaria sive de
Local Meridian     By analogy with the Earth, we also define a Celestial Equator. The Equa-      horographia gnomonica tum
The Ecliptic       tor is the longest circular line perpendicular to the axis of rotation, sep-  theoretica tum practica, Rome,
Equinoxes And      arating the Earth into northern and southern hemispheres. The celestial       1648, p. 334.
Solstices          Equator is 0° DEC, and the poles are +90° and -90°. Right ascension (RA)
                   is the celestial equivalent of Longitude.
The Zodiac
                   The cardinal points (north, east, south, and west) are defined from Hori-
Latitude & Longi-  zon.
tude
                   The observer's vertical axis passes through a unique point, the zenith,
Astronomical       90 degrees from the Horizon.
Hour (Optional)
                   The meridian is the great circle that passes through the North, South
Babylonian Hours   Point, and zenith and lies on the celestial Sphere.
(Optional)
Italian Hours      The Ecliptic is the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun, represent-
(Optional)         ing the solar movement in a year.
System Of the
Astrological       The zero point for celestial Longitude (for right ascension) is the Vernal
Houses of The      Equinox, the intersection of the Ecliptic and the celestial Equator near
Sky (Optional)     the Sun in the Northern Hemisphere Spring. The point on the Ecliptic
                   where the Sun is most north of the celestial Equator is termed the
                   Summer Solstice, and the point where it is most south of the celestial
                   Equator is termed the Winter Solstice. The other meeting of the Celes-
                   tial Equator and the Ecliptic is the Autumnal Equinox.

                   The zodiacal constellations are found in a ring along the celestial
                   Equator, formed from the chance superposition of the stars which lie
                   along these lines of sight. As the Earth rotates once around the Sun in
                   a year, the Sun appears to pass through (or lie in front of ) each of these
                   constellations in turn. Its path is called the Ecliptic. Here is the list of
                   Zodiac: Gemini (the Twins), Cancer (the Crab), Leo (the Lion), Virgo
                   (the Maiden), Libra (the Scale), Scorpio (the Scorpion), Sagittarius (the
                   Archer), Capricorn (the Goat), Aquarius (the Water-Carrier), Pisces (the
                   Fish), Aries (the Ram), and Taurus (the Bull).

                   Latitude and Longitude are the units that represent the coordinates in
                   the geographic coordinate system. The geographic coordinate system
                   is a spherical or ellipsoidal coordinate system for measuring and com-
                   municating positions directly on the Earth as latitude and Longitude.

                   The astronomical hour system is also known as the French hour
                   system (civil time or equal time). It tells the solar time as we are using
                   today on modern watches. It provides twenty-four fixed equal periods
                   of the day and is divided into two cycles every twelve hours.

                   Babylonian hours are equinoctial hours counted from sunrise. The
                   interval between two sunrises is divided into 24 equal hours.

                   Italian hours are equinoctial hours counted from the last sunset. The
                   interval between two sunsets is divided into 24 equal hours.

                   The twelve houses are purely mathematical creations. The unit circle,
                   which is 360 degrees in diameter, can represent the expanse of the
                   heavens.

24.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

The second lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's                                   ther Emanuele Maignan did not mention any of the
book: The projection of A Celestial Sphere                                  pioneers of this field in his work. We must recognize
This is an introductory and advanced book for indi-                         that Maignan's approach to observation and experi-
viduals interested in sundial research and who wish                         menting is unique and personal. Maignan offered a
to use it immediately to make their own reflecting                          method to make a reflecting sundial based on pro-
sundial. In his book, Maignan mentioned a lot about                         jecting a catoptric sphere. The "catoptric sphere," a
using catoptric spheres to create sundial projections                       reflected version of a mixed celestial sphere, is used
on interior architectural surfaces. From part XI page.                      for the simulated projection of a celestial sphere onto
34 until section XXI ends on the page. 58, Maignan                          a complex surface (Figure 1.46). The Sphere results
illustrated the theory of the Sphere and its circles and                    from the reflection of an ordinary celestial sphere
projection onto the plane (Figure 1.45). This is a very                     through a mirror placed at its center, which is unusu-
innovative method never seen before; it shows the                           al for the astronomy field. This method of Maignan is
projection of spheres onto curved arches in home                            purely personal; it comes from his long observations
interiors. On the left, we see an image of the projec-                      and experiments in Italy. Figure 1.47 is an excellent
tion of the spheres and circles in the vertical plane,                      engraving describing the ideal application of the
with the observer placing his eyes on the projection                        "horizontal catoptric sphere" in fabricating a catop-
of the Sun's rays. On the right, the circles of the ce-                     tric. The author provides no mention of the location
lestial Sphere in the plane form the horizontal sun-                        depicted in the image. It could be a reflective sun-
dial. This drawing bears a great deal of resemblance                        dial that Maignan built in another place. Because of
to that published by Luigi Ronca in Gnomonica sulla                         its wide application, the thesis will use the projection
sfera ed analemma di Vitruvio three centuries ago.15                        theory of the catoptric Sphere to analyze case studies
Although until now, there is much debate about                              of other reflective sundials. From that, we will be able
who first created the reflector sundial and why Fa-                         to design our perfect reflected sundial.

5. When sunlight passes through openings in leaf or overstory               Figure 1.46 3D Reconstruction of the projection of A Celestial
     plant canopies, strong pe-numbral effects (e.g., penumbral light -     Sphere Based on from Emmanuel Maignan's book.
     spreading) can result in major changes in the total sunlit area, the
     irradiance level, and exposure duration at the incident surface.                        25.

6. Rey-Pailhade Jde Rome A Favot A. Le Cadran Solaire Du Lycee De
     Jeunes Filles De Grenoble. Grenoble: Joseph Allier; 1921.

7. NiceronJeanFrancois.ThaumaturgusOpticus:ParsPrima.Lutetiae
     Parisiorum: s.n; 1646.

8. Perrucci, Salvatore, Le linee del tempo: architettura, gnomonica,
     geometria, 2013, p.32.

9. Athanasius Kircher, Britannica Online, Encyclopædia Britannica, Re-
     trieved June 4, 2021.

10. N. Severino, La meridiana a riflessione fu inventata da Raffaele Mi-
     rami? www.nicolaseverino.it, Roccasecca (FR), Retrieved June 4,
     2021.

11. Bortot, A., Emmanuel Maignan e Francesco Borromini. Il progetto di
     una villa scientifica nella Roma barocca. Siracusa, (2020).

12. Bortot, Alessio. "Rainbows Between Art and Science an Unconven-
     tional Analysis." Img Journal 2022, No. 6 (2022), p. 50-65.

13. Nicola, Severino. "La meridiana a riflessione fu inventata da raffaele
     mirami?" Istituto E Museo Di Storia Della Scienza, Firenze, Www.
     Nicolaseverino. It ,2007.

14. Nicola Severino Gnomonica, "Emanuele Maignan E La Gnomonica
     Catottrica", https://www.academia.edu/39910897/emanuele_
     maignan_e_la_gnomonica_catottrica Accessed 15 May 2023.

15. Ronca, Luigi. Gnomonica sulla sfera ed analemma di Vitruvio. Acca-
     demia nazionale dei Lincei, 1976.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Figure 1.48 Scheme indicating    The third lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book: The Reflected Celestial
the reflection of solar rays on  Sphere - Catoptric Sphere
a circular mirror, Emmanuel      Maignan's work is more than simply a technical book on catoptrics. It also ex-
Maignan, Perspectiva horaria     plained the procedures for creating the reflective sundials at the Palazzo Spada
sive de horographia gnomoni-     and the Trinità dei Monti Monastery. The book could be considered a valuable
ca tum theoretica tum practica,  treatise on Gnomonics which was created by the personal observations of Fa-
Rome, 1648, p. 283.              ther Maignan. Although the book is intended for those who study catoptrics, it
                                 also includes the classical and fundamental theories of the discipline. The math-
Figure 1.50 Finding the local    ematical and geometrical ideas that connect Apollonius' Conics with the rules
latitude by measuring the si-    of perspective were underlined by Daniele Barbaro and Federico Comman-
dereal elevation, Emmanuel       dino.16 Emmanuel Maignan employed it the following century when he built
Maignan, Perspectiva horaria     two catoptric sundials in the papal capital, one in Palazzo Spada and one in the
sive de horographia gnomoni-     monastery of Trinità dei Monti. They could be simply projecting the reflected
ca tum theoretica tum practica,  Celestial Sphere onto a surface.
Rome, 1648, p. 163.              The problem is clearly explained on page 283 of Maignan's treatise dedicated
                                 to catoptric sundials, emblematically entitled Perspectiva horaria sive de Horo-
                                 graphia gnomonica (Maignan year 1648). Segment OB creates the celestial
                                 Sphere into two equal versions; the left half features a schematization of the
                                 Sun on the arch of the sky vault and the outermost lines of a luminous cone,
                                 i.e., the incident sun rays. The right half of the image displays the Sun and the
                                 luminous cone in symmetrical positions, corresponding to the left half. A plane
                                 is placed between the mirror, represented by the ellipse VX, and the symmetri-
                                 cal representation of the Sun; it intercepts the reflection of the luminous cone,
                                 forming another picture of the celestial body on its surface (Figure 1.48). If we
                                 compare Maignan's scheme to the principles of perspective, the two suns can
                                 be intended as the bases of the visual cones whose vertices are in the point
                                 of observation D and E. As a result, he created a reflected version of a celestial
                                 sphere shown in (Figure 1.49). In the following chapter; we will use this version
                                 of a celestial sphere to analyze the reflected sundial case studies.

Figure 1.49 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome, 1648, p. 324,
328, 330, 332.

26.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Maignan's celestial projection technique:                          Figure 1.56 3D Reconstruction Figure 1.55 3D Reconstruction
To build and trace the lines of the systems present
on the sundial, Maignan used various tools he in-
vented. These instruments are illustrated in detail
in his book Perspedtiva horaria and the building
instructions. Father Maignan used this method to
indicate a catoptric sphere. Firstly, locating the local
latitude (Figure 1.50), i.e., which axis goes through
the North Star. We can identify the Sun's declina-
tions and astronomical hours, Italic and Babylonian.
Follow up by drawing the meridian line from north
to south and the horizon line. With the "Vertica-
le mobile" tool (Figure 1.51), it is possible to create
the celestial coordinates. Using horizontal sundial
and vertical style, both are located on the mirror's
position; we can create a first draft for the sundial
(Figure 1.52) by projecting them onto the ceiling
and walls of the interior. With the "Meridiano mo-
bile" tool (Figure 1.53), It is possible to create lines of
the hourly astronomical system. The same principle
will be applied to indicate the Italic and Babylonian
dial system (Figure 1.54). Finally, the temporary hour
lines are drawn to intersect with all the others on
the equinoctial line. The system Of the Astrological
Houses of The Sky will be drawn with the "Verticale
mobile" tool positioned horizontally and aligned on
the north-south line.

                                                                   of the Verticale mobile.        of the Meridiano mobile.

Figure 1.51 Verticale mobile,   Figure 1.52 Tracing of catoptric   Figure 1.53 Meridiano mobile,   Figure 1.54 Construction of
Emmanuel Maignan, Perspecti-    lines through a flat sundial, Em-  Emmanuel Maignan, Perspecti-    declinations and hour lines,
va horaria sive de horographia  manuel Maignan, Perspectiva        va horaria sive de horographia  Emmanuel Maignan, Perspecti-
gnomonica tum theoretica        horaria sive de horographia        gnomonica tum theoretica        va horaria sive de horographia
tum practica, Rome, 1648, p.    gnomonica tum theoretica           tum practica, Rome, 1648, p.    gnomonica tum theoretica
373.                            tum practica, Rome, 1648, p.       378.                            tum practica, Rome, 1648, p.
                                432.                                                               387.
Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
                                                                                                         27.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    5.

           Case Studies on Notable
               Reflective Sundial

                                  After modeling the catoptric or celestial sphere based on Emanuele Maignan's
                                  research studies, we will apply it to analyze some typical examples of historical
                                  reflective sundials. The objective was to examine the applicability of Emanu-
                                  ele Maignan's research method. There are two candidates for the case studies
                                  analyzing: the reflective sundial at Palazzo Spada, Rome - Emmanuel Maignan
                                  (1644) and the reflective sundial at The Church of San Cristo in Brescia. These
                                  reflective sundials were created on complex surfaces such as walls and vaults.
                                  The drawn lines are indicated based on the luminous dot over months (or even
                                  years). Creating a sundial on any surface becomes a geometric projection prob-
                                  lem of a celestial sphere onto a particular surface.

Figure 1.57 Facade of the Pala-                          Case Study 1:
zzo Spada (Photo courtesy of
Daderot)                             The Reflecting Sundial at Palazzo Spada, Rome - Emmanuel Maignan
                                                                              (1644)
Figure 1.58 Portrait of Minim
friar and mathematician Jean      Remarkable Roman Dial made by Maignan in 1644 near Capo de Ferro, in Pala-
François Niceron, illustration    zzo Spada. The reflecting sundial at Palazzo Spada (Figure 1.57) is the starting
to Niceron's "Thaumaturgus        point for the case studies of this thesis. Palazzo Spada is the building in Rome
Opticus" (Paris: François Lan-    that houses the Council of State and Galleria Spada. It is located in Piazza Capo
glois dit Ciartres, 1646), Print  di Ferro, a small square in the Regola district, along the road that leads from
made by: Michel Lasne             Piazza Farnese to Via Arenula. It was built in 1540 for Cardinal Girolamo Recana-
                                  ti Capodiferro (1501-1559).17 The architect is Bartolomeo Baronino from Casale
28.                               Monferrato. The palace was purchased in 1632 by Cardinal Bernardino Spada,
                                  who commissioned Francesco Borromini to modify it in the new Baroque style.
                                  Its variety and the confusion of its networks inside the sundial make it one of
                                  the most complicated dials ever built. The palazzo once belonged to a Cardinal
                                  Spada, a well-known Maecenas, who had asked Maignan to layout a most com-
                                  plete and, if possible. This reflective Dial is also mentioned in Niceron's book "
                                  Thaumaturgus Opticus" of 1646 (Figure 1.58). At that time, geometric, graphical,
                                  experimental, and instrumental methods were dominant.
                                  The Geometric Problem of The Reflecting Sundial in Palazzo Spada.
                                  The sundial is located inside a gallery with a mirror on the wall facing approx-
                                  imately southeast. Maignan made this place becomes a masterpiece of com-
                                  plication! The vaulted ceiling of the gallery has a cylindrical profile, and the in-
                                  tersection of the two differently arched surfaces forms a continuous curve on
                                  which the dial lines are drawn. As usual, the various line systems presented dif-
                                  ferent colors. Indeed, the creation is simply the projection of the hour lines on
                                  a cylinder vault. The difficulty to be solved is projecting onto surfaces of any
                                  shape and orientation from a given point in space (Figure 1.59). Considering the
                                  specific case of Maignan's catoptric sundials, the question can be reformulated
                                  in geometrical terms as the intersection between two quadratic surfaces:
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Axonometric

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Rome)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox

           Equator

                                      Figure 1.60 3D Simulation of The Reflecting Sundial at Palaz-
                                           zo Spada, Rome (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)

One is the reflected cone, which results from the         Section AA'
mirror's center and the light beam that connects the
Sun's positions through time. The second quadratic        Figure 1.59 The section of The Reflecting Sundial at Palazzo
surface is the cylinder of the barrel vault, which has a  Spada, Rome (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
circular base, while lines that form the lateral surface
are parallel to a horizontal plane. The intersection
between these two surfaces generates a network of
quartic curves18, i.e., curves that cannot be represent-
ed on a plane. We reconstructed an ideal celestial
sphere associated with Rome's latitude (41.9028° N),
including many hour lines, cones of light, beams of
light, and plans of light. The sphere's center was po-
sitioned with the mirror's center on the window sill.
By applying a 3D Simulation of the Celestial Sphere
to Analysis, we get the intersection of the geometric
of the sun's light one by one with the spherical vault
(Figure 1.60). The network of quartic curves is visible
from both the outside and inside of the room.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                             29.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Figure 1.61 The Church of San                              Case study 2:
Cristo in Brescia (Photo courte-
sy of Ho Trong Nhan)                      The reflecting sundial at The Church of San Cristo in Brescia, Italy

Figure 1.62 The cross vaults of     In the second case study, we will analyze the reflective sundial in the Church of
the Franciscan cloister of Mar-     San Cristo in Brescia (Figure 1.61),19 renovated and reopened in 2002. The Church
tinengo, Bergamo 2011.              is located along Via Giovanni Piamarta. The building was built in the second half
                                    of the fifteenth century. It is part of the vast monastery, which comprises three
Figure 1.63 The vertical plane      cloisters. The Church is usually defined as the Sistine Chapel of Brescia, given the
clock with French hours kept in     scenic affinities of Michelangelo's work in the Roman Sistine Chapel. The creator
the cloister of Santa Maria della   of this exquisite reflective sundial remains unknown. We can only guess that
Pace in Alzano Lombardo near        it was Fra Domenico, a student of Franciscan Father Vincenzo Coronelli. In the
Bergamo, 2011.                      region of Bergamo, there are a huge collection of sundials (Figure 1.62,63,64).
                                    Some are in terrible condition, while others have just been repaired, but only for
                                    the visual aspect. Therefore, they are mostly inactive due to the significant diffi-
                                    culties in precisely situating the gnomonic mirror. Only a few sundials still retain
                                    their fine skill of chronometry, as the one in the Church of San Cristo, Brescia.
                                    The concept of operation of The Reflecting Sundial in Brescia is the same as else-
                                    where. It employs the use of a reflecting mirror to send sunlight deep into the
                                    architectural environment. The mirror was placed in the center of the arch. The
                                    mirror is 25 cm from the ceiling. Reflective glass and stainless-steel panels were
                                    modified to suit the outdoor conditions during the 2002 renovations (Figure
                                    1.65). On the decorative ceiling, one can read the hours of the day, the months,
                                    the zodiac signs, and Latin inscriptions honoring the sun and moon. The design
                                    presents the Italics Hour in gray with 24 hours as in the clock, after which red
                                    French hours are added to the time of Napoleon, counted from 1 to 12. The lines
                                    of the hours intersect with the lines of the MONTHs. Furthermore, the month
                                    at the top of the sign is June (summer solstice), and the month at the bottom
                                    is December (winter solstice). Each month is represented by a zodiac sign. The
                                    12-hour meridian with the name of the city of Brescia is placed in the middle
                                    when the sun is at its highest point of the day. We can also observe the time
                                    in different locations such as the Canary Islands, Jerusalem, Mecca, Lisbon, the
                                    East Indies, etc. The popularity of the reflective sundial most likely indicates a
                                    hidden spiritual meaning underneath the religion's soul. The dome's ceiling is
                                    symbolic of Creation, and the dome itself is a portrayal of the Dome of Heaven.20
                                    Where the reflection of the sun in a faint light produces the sensation that Love
                                    originates from God 21. We reconstructed an ideal celestial sphere associated to
                                    Brescia's latitude (45.5416° N). We are using the same operations of reflection
                                    and intersection of the luminous surfaces with the 3D model of the dome. By
                                    applying a 3D Simulation of the Celestial Sphere to Analysis, we get the inter-
                                    section of the geometric of the sun's light one by one with the corridor's dome
                                    (Figure 1.66).

Figure 1.64 The quadrant under      16. Monteleone, Cosimo, and Andrea Giordano. "Perspective at Palladio's Time and Its Scientific Heritage."
the cross vault in the cloister of       Nexus Network Journal 21 (2019), p.253-270.
Romacolo, Bergamo, 2011.
                                    17. Girolamo Recanati Capodiferro was an Italian Roman Catholic bishop and cardinal.
30.                                 18. A quartic plane curve is a plane algebraic curve of the fourth degree.
                                    19. G. Agnelli, Ripristinata una meridiana catottrica del `700 nel convento saveriano di sancristo a brescia-cit-

                                         ta,' fromWebGnomonices!ThefirstItaliandigitalmagazineofGnomonica,byNicolaSeverino,2004.
                                    20. Notes on Christian iconography, Sereni Editore, 2012.
                                    21. G. Agnelli, Historical Memoirs of the Diocese of Brescia, in Brixia Sacra, third series, Milan, April 1997.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Axonometric

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Rome)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox

           Equator

                                           Figure 1.66 3D Simulation of at The Church of San Cristo in
                                                     Brescia (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)

                                                                    Section AA'

Surveys based on these two case studies are still at    Figure 1.65 The section of The Reflecting Sundial at The Church
the schematic level. Therefore, there are still many    of San Cristo in Brescia (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
possibilities for further research. What we learn from
these surveys is once again confirming the applica-
bility of Emanuele Maignan's catoptric sphere meth-
od, although his method of research is unorthodox
and highly personal. From here I apply this method
to investigate the object of study in this thesis: the
reflected sundial in Grenoble.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                                31.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

    Chapter 2:

Surveying and Analyzing the
Reflective Sundial in Stendhal

       School, Grenoble

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              33.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    1.

      A History of The Lycée Stendhal

                                 (Grenoble,France)

100km                    A History of The Lycée Stendhal in Grenoble (Figure 2.1)
                         The Lycée Stendhal, located in the southern French city of Grenoble, is a
       France            prominent secondary school with a long history of over two centuries. The
                         Cité Scolaire Stendhal (college and high school) is a public secondary school
       Grenoble          located on Place Jean Achard in Grenoble. A fantastic position in the center
                         of Grenoble, with easy access to public transportation, culture, and sports
                         facilities. The school's history dates back to the 17th century. Lycée Stendhal
                         was part of the former Collègedes Jésuites. It is the oldest school in Greno-
                         ble. Its pupils have included Stendhal (after whom it is now named)22 (Figure
                         2.2). The school's history is tidily connected with the Society of Jesus devel-
                         opment in Grenoble since its first member settled here in January 1623.23 By
                         authorization of Louis XIII, a branch of the Society of Jesus was established
                         in Grenoble (passing through the capital Dauphiné). Bishop Scarron super-
                         vised the entire process. The Society of Jesus was also located in Chambéry,
                         Lyon, Tournon, Vienne, etc.

       Grenoble, France  The Lycée Stendhal
                         Grenoble, France

                         Figure 2.4 The Axonometry of
                         Lycée Stendhal, Grenoble.

34.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Before the entire building was finished in 1703, they                Royale des Sciences in Paris, where he became a cor-
constructed the surrounding buildings gradually.                     responding member in 1699, and published pam-
From 1672 to 1674, professor of mathematics, Jesuit                  phlets and essays on his inventions and astronomical
Father Jean Bonfa (1638-1724) taught at Grenoble.                    observations.25
With his students' assistance, he took advantage of                  Bonfa's primary work as a Jesuit professor was to
a vast and beautiful stone staircase on the school's                 teach practical theology and applied mathematics.
southern side, to paint a massive reflected sundial in               He also sought recognition as a mathematician and
Grenoble, which is still visible today. The restoration              astronomer locally and in Rome and Paris. He estab-
of the reflective sundial happened in 1755, 1855,                    lished for himself a modest scientific career. At the
1900, and 1918.24 However, the information retained                  Marseille Arsenal, he served French naval interests by
does not reveal which parts were fixed during each                   instructing pilots and officers in hydrography and ba-
time. By the end of the eighteenth century or the be-                sic geometry. Thus, although Bonfa lived most of his
ginning of the nineteenth (according to a note in the                life in the papal territory, his language, culture, and
Archives), the reflective sundial had lost its mirrors,              scholarship were essentially French.
and the Horologium novum had lost its style.                         However, Bonfa's map of the Comtat Venaissin (Figure
The Career of Jesuit Father Jean Bonfa                               2.3) was different. In producing it, Bonfa embraced
Jean Bonfa was a Jesuit theology and mathematics                     local and papal agendas that were anti-French. Ironi-
professor. Only the most basic details of Bonfa's life               cally, this meant that later cartographers would over-
are known: he was born on 30 May 1638 in Nîmes                       look his exceptional accomplishment. There are few
and joined the Society of Jesus on 31 January 1654.                  remains of Bonfa's work left.26 Aside from his map,
He taught mathematics (and eventually theology) at                   just a few dozen publications and correspondence,
Jesuit colleges in Grenoble (the early 1670s) and Avi-               the enormous sundial in Grenoble, and some lecture
gnon (late 1670s and from 1683), taught the princi-                  notes on applied mathematics and religion have sur-
ples of geometry and hydrography as professor royal                  vived. References to Bonfa's map are found in three
at the Marseille Arsenal (1680-1682).                                of his surviving letters and minutes of provincial de-
He collaborated with astronomers at the Academie                     liberations.

Figure 2.1 The Lycée Stendhal         Figure 2.2 Stendhal, Ma-       Figure 2.3 Le Comtj Venaissin par le R. P. Bonfa de la Compagnie
in Grenoble (Photo courtesy           rie-Henri Beyle (Photo cour-   de Jesus professeur des Mathimatiques a Avignon, engraved and
of Ho Trong Nhan)                     tesy of Gamma-Rapho, Getty     printed by L. David in 1696, altered and reprinted in 1762. (Photo
                                      Images)                        courtesy of Bibliotheque Ceccano, Avignon; Photo Daspet.)

Figure 2.6 Mirror positioned          Figure 2.7 The time systems    Figure 2.8 Inscriptions decorated inside the Reflective Sundi-
on the windowsill of the              inside the Reflective Sundial  al in Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
staircase (Photo courtesy of          in Grenoble. (Photo courtesy
Ho Trong Nhan)                        of Ho Trong Nhan)                               35.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    2.

          The Reflection Sundial of
  The Stendhal High School in Grenoble

                                       (France)

The Existing Condition of The Reflective Sundial in         relative to the sun. At certain times of the month, the
Grenoble:                                                   moon's rays can also be seen, creating a faint spot over
At the end of the 17th century, astrology was still wide-   the staircase. Together with designing a vast sundial,
ly practiced. This science has been part of university      Father Jean Bonfa also created notable astronomy ta-
mathematics teaching at that time. Father Bonfa's re-       bles which updated the newest astronomical develop-
flective sundial is a fascinating example of how ancient    ments of his time. The sundial is a perpetual lunisolar
technology can still be used today. In this part, we will   calendar that operates almost automatically. It was a
delve deeper into the description of this remarkable        great novelty at the time. Finally, with the Horologium
piece of technology. The massive reflected sundial is       novum table, we can determine the moon's position
kept in one of Lycée Stendhal's staircases in the cen-      in the sky at any time and anywhere in the universe.27
ter of Grenoble. Here is some geographic information        Through Father Bonfa's drawing on the inside parts of
about Grenoble:                                             the stairs, we can get a complete picture of the politi-
· Latitude of Grenoble: 45.1885° N                          cal situation in France at this time. To understand the
· Longitude of Grenoble: 5.7245° E                          monument, you should visit the following: we go to
· The distance in longitude from London to Paris is 9       the landing of the stairs where two mirrored are locat-
                                                            ed on windows. We read, on the left, in a cartridge dec-
    min 21 sec.                                             orated with ribbons: TEMPORI ET . ÆTERNITATI ( which
The facility of the school is approximately 500 square      we translate in a very intelligible way by This dial marks
meters (Figure 2.4). It is a large, rectangular structure   TIME for today and ETERNITY) (Figure 2.8). The follow-
with a symmetrical facade featuring classical elements      ing are the dimensions and data of the sundial:
such as columns . Figure 2.5 is the section of the build-   · The stairs are not perfectly oriented north-south.
ing that is based on the result of my survey on Febru-
ary 26, 2022. The sundial is composed of a collection           The stairs' axis is 1° 52' East.
of Baroque-style paintings painted on the walls and         · Each staircase has a width of 2,05 m.
ceiling of the stairway connecting the first and second     · The thickness of the wall is 0.33 m.
levels. To read time, we need to track the movement         · At the landing, the distance between the ceiling
of the sun's light from bottom to top (corresponding
to sunrise to noon) and then down (corresponding to             and the floor is 3.55 meters.
midday to sunset). The reflection of the sun's rays onto    · Distance between the centers of the two mirrors:
a mirror positioned on the windowsill creates this light
spot (Figure 2.6). Father Jean Bonfa's work is around           1,63 m
one hundred square meters in size, including many dif-      · The ceiling height above mirrors is 2,60 m
ferent time systems inside it: French time, i.e., the cur-  · Distance from the center of the west mirror to the
rent time, counting from midnight; Babylonian time,
starting at sunrise; Italian time, which he called Roman        west wall: 1,42 m
time; twelve months of the solar calendar, the twelve       · Distance between the center of the west mirror
signs of the zodiac, which are represented by symbolic
images, and the four seasons of the year: AESTAS, AU-           and the shear wall: 0,65 m
TUMNUS, HIBERNUM, and VER (Figure 2.7).                     · Distance from the east mirror to the east wall: 1,42
The clock also shows the times of sunrise and sunset.
By the sundial (La Méridienne ), we can acknown the             m
season, month, and day by the position of the bright        · Distance from east mirror to shear wall: 0,65 m
spot. At the same time, the sundial includes lunar cal-     · Distance from the mirror to the West ceiling: 3,37 m
endar information and determines the moon's age             · Distance from the mirror to the East ceiling: 3,10 m
                                                            · The slope of rising and falling ceilings: 3,80 m for
36.
                                                                10m ( i=38% )
                                                            This work still shows the author's aesthetic taste, in-
                                                            genuity, and science two and a half centuries after its
                                                            creation.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :                              37.
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
Orange lines: Sunlight spots
on the interior through a
mirror on the window.

Figure 2.5 The section of Ly-
cée Stendhal, Grenoble, with
the sunlight spot on February
26, 2022.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    3.

           Methods of Survey and
           Digital Reconstruction

Figure 2.9 Photos of guests    Grenoble, a beautiful mountain city in France, hosts a hidden architectural
visiting Grenoble's reflected  wonder: the Reflective Sundial at The Lycée Stendhal. This unique structure,
sundial on March 26th, 2022.   rich in history and mystery, has piqued the interest of both residents and tour-
(Photo courtesy of Ho Trong    ists. In this part, the thesis presents survey proposals for the Sundial, provid-
Nhan)                          ing an insight into its unique aspects and the problems encountered through-
                               out the research.
38.                            Our journey begins with a desire to learn, which started before September
                               2021. Seeking to delve into the secrets of Grenoble's rich heritage, a letter was
                               addressed to the city's tourist office, which expressed a desire to conduct a
                               brief survey at the reflective Sundial of Lycée Stendhal. However, time passed,
                               and despite the bureau's guarantee that the question would be forwarded to
                               the relevant department, the hunger for information remained unsatisfied.
                               Despite the absence of an official answer, a decision was made to seize the op-
                               portunity and explore the Reflective Sundial as a tourist with a strong interest
                               in Grenoble's history.
                               Therefore, this thesis might be a reference guide for anyone seeking a spon-
                               taneous experience. The primary goal is to gain a 3D scan that captures the
                               character of historic structures, which is motivated by ambition and curiosity.
                               The crowded atmosphere of the site of tourism provided a challenge to over-
                               come.
                               The sundial survey took place on February 26th and March 26th, 2022.28 The
                               investigation required me to measure the staircase's size, photograph its walls
                               and ceilings, and carefully document every aspect. To ensure a comprehen-
                               sive survey, specific requirements must be followed to capture the character
                               of The Lycée Stendhal's Reflective Sundial. The conditions needed are as fol-
                               lows:
                               · Time Restriction: It is critical to complete the survey within one hour, which

                                   is the time limit for visiting purposes.
                               · Considerate Exploration: It is critical to explore without disturbing other

                                   visitors' interest in the building's history (Figure 2.9).
                               · Staircase Geometry: The survey must adapt to the specific elements of the

                                   staircase, including the stepping patterns and the U-Shape design.
                               · Attention to Detail: Due to the limited access to the Reflective Sundial, it is

                                   critical to precisely document every minute detail throughout the survey.
                               To commence the survey, the first step involves measuring the essential di-
                               mensions of the staircase, including the number of steps and the width and
                               height of the area. This fundamental data offers a foundation for future re-
                               search. In addition to measurements, the photographs acquired during the
                               survey will help digitally reconstruct the Reflective Sundial.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Method of Dimension Measurement                          Figure 2.10 Dimensions developed from the survey at Greno-
Initially, the passageway of the Reflective Sundial      ble's reflecting sundial.
was measured using a metric string as the staircase
took a U-shaped form incorporating a landing for en-     Figure 2.11 Dimensions obtained by the trilateration meth-
hanced safety. To ensure measurement accuracy, two       od.
parallel stages were employed for calibration and im-
provement.
The first technique involved utilizing a ruler to mea-
sure the staircase's specific details and overall di-
mensions. Measuring tape or a laser measure was
effective due to the limited space of approximately
100m2. The following steps were followed for the
measurement process:
1. Calculate the total number of stairs and treads in

    the staircase. Each side consisted of 15 stairs and
    one landing (Figure 2.10).
2. As the accompanying image depicts, a typical
    step has a riser height of 160mm, a 380mm tread
    depth, and a 2050mm tread width (Figure 2.10).
3. A measuring tape was used to collect measure-
    ments from the third floor's finished level to the
    landing step and from the landing step to the sec-
    ond floor's finished level. The dimensions mea-
    sured for each side were around 2.5m, with an
    average ceiling height of 4300mm (Figure 2.10).
The second method involved using trilateration to
calculate the overall length of the staircase.29 The
measuring procedure was divided into two sections
to minimize interruption to other guests during the
tour guide's presentation. While the tour guide was
presenting on the East side of the staircase, the mea-
surements occurred from the staircase's West side
opposite. This procedure is similar for the other side.
This guarantees that the survey did not interfere with
the people around.
The trilateration method was implemented to mea-
sure the stair, establishing eight fixed stations to
"spot" as many points as possible, ensuring survey
accuracy. Coordinating points A, B, G, and H were lo-
cated 2500mm higher from the finished level, while
corresponding points D, E, F, and C were situated at
the same level as the landing (Figure 2.11). After the
measuring procedure was completed, two copies of
the staircase size were acquired, one for each mea-
surement technique. Overlapping these versions
produced a final file with precise dimensions (Figure
2.12).

                                                         Figure 2.12 The 3D model has been generated by comparing
                                                         the two measuring methods.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                 39.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Figure 2.13 The diagram illustrates the                 Photographing Stairs for 3D Scanning: A Step-by-
picture collection procedure for photo-                 Step Guide
grammetry.                                              Photography techniques must also follow the same
                                                        scenario to minimize the influence on surrounding
40.                                                     visitors. In this session, we'll divide the stairs into 3
                                                        phases to maximize later photography and photo-
                                                        grammetry work. It is divided into two sections for
                                                        the stair sides and one for the landing. We will cap-
                                                        ture three parts in each area to cover most of the wall
                                                        and ceiling. The photographic survey was carried out
                                                        by choosing holding points at 600mm, 1200mm, and
                                                        1800mm from the ground from which images were
                                                        shot to generate the spherical panoramas (Figure
                                                        2.13).
                                                        The photographing procedure is shown in the
                                                        cross-section below. The aim is to cover the stairs with
                                                        pictures that overlap approximately 60% of the area.
                                                        In addition, photographs were taken orthogonally to
                                                        the ceiling along the corridor's central longitudinal
                                                        axis. In total, 309 photos were taken with at least 60%
                                                        overlap between one and the other, producing ten
                                                        hemispherical panoramas (Figure 2.14).

                                                        Figure 2.14 The photographs were shot during a study of
                                                        reflecting sundials in Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong
                                                        Nhan)
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023                    Ceiling of the Staircase
Università Iuav di Venezia                               The Central West Wall

   The West Side Wall

  The Central East Wall

                                                        The East Side Wall

Figure 2.15 Grenoble's reflecting sundial
3D model scan with texturing.

Synthesizing Images into 3D Files: A Process of         amining photos from multiple angles and estimat-
Transformation                                          ing their 3D locations. As a result, there are 571,393
The next crucial step in the 3D scanning process in-    colored points in the point cloud. After validating
volves entering the captured photographs into the       the spatial correctness of the draft model, a dense
Agisoft PhotoScan Professional program.30 With-         point cloud of 104,406,819 points is created. At this
in the Agisoft PhotoScan Professional application,      point, the mesh structure of the 3D model has been
photos are processed, aligned based on standard         built, and there are 20,881,363 faces at the end of
criteria, and spatial relationships are established.    the process (Figure 2.15). Despite the complexity of
The powerful identification skills of the program       these operations, the software efficiently complet-
find matching spots. These points serve as refer-       ed the tasks, occupying the PC for a total processing
ence points, making the alignment process easier        time of 86 hours. Upon generating a 3D model with
and assuring the correctness of the final 3D model.     materials in Agisoft PhotoScan, it could be export-
After the alignment is complete, Agisoft PhotoScan      ed in various formats, such as dxf, obj, mtl, and 3DS.
Professional generates a dense point cloud. This        The following chapter dives into the 3D analysis of
stage entails creating a thick set of 3D points by ex-  the created model.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                 41.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                                        Enlarged Plan
                                                        Scale 1:50

42.                                                                    Second Floor Plan
                                                                       Scale 1:150
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

             A                        Enlarged Section AA'
Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              Scale 1:50

                                               A'

                                      Enlarged Plan
                                      Scale 1:50

                                          43.
   The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
   Grenoble (FR)

                     4.

Unveiling the Fresco's Meaning of Reflective

          Sundial at Stendhal School

The East Side Wall                                                                                          The Central West Wall

The Central East Wall                                                                                       The West Side Wall

Ceiling of the Staircase

                          Figure 2.16 Plan and section of reflective sundial at Stendhal School, Grenoble.

In the previous section, field surveys at the site pro-   ing of the prevailing time in different regions of France.
vided an approximate three-dimensional model file         Contained within the confines of this stairway, Father
of the Grenoble Reflective Sundial. The sundial in the    Bonfa has included the following tables:
Stendhal School in Grenoble holds significant histori-    · HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock)
cal value. However, comprehending his crucial histori-    · HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM
cal work on the sundial challenges contemporary visi-     · NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE New Moon Civil
tors' understanding. This section aims to elucidate the
fundamental constituents of the Grenoble Reflective           Calendar
Sundial, thereby facilitating a comprehensive under-      · Tables of Epactes
standing of their operation and usage.                    · CALENDARVM SOC. IESV. - Calendar of the Society
Unveiling the Fresco's Meaning of Reflective Sundial
at Stendhal School, Grenoble                                  of Jesus
The Grenoble Reflective Sundial not only displays art-    · CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar)
work depicting the movement of the sun, but it also       Father Bonfa was a pioneer and creator, paving the way
includes a collection of tables painted by Father Bon-    for installing the Reflective Sundial and developing the
fa, providing uniqueness to this extraordinary location   NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New Moon Civil Cal-
(Figure 2.16). These tables serve as mathematical in-     endar, a system for dealing with lunar issues. By study-
struments designed to aid observers in comprehend-        ing these historical artifacts, we aim to understand
ing the solar time system and facilitating the calculat-  better the mathematical and astronomical knowledge
                                                          underpinning the Reflective Sundial and its enduring
44.                                                       legacy.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                                                                                                                                         HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE
                                                                                                                                         (Universal clock)

CALENDARIVM MARIANVM
             (Calendar of Mary)

Figure 2.17 The HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock)
on the west side wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.

Figure 2.19 The table of CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Calendar
of Mary) on the west side wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial

                                      The West Side Wall

HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock)                          hours. Adding 6 hours to that, we determine that it is
Jesuit colleges span across various regions worldwide,           12 ½ hours in Jerusalem. Another scenario arises when
and the HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock)                  we need to determine the time in Jerusalem for lunar
(Figure 2.17) plays a crucial role in determining the time       purposes. For instance, if it is eleven o'clock at night in
of cities where these educational institutions are situ-         Grenoble on October 3rd, and we seek the correspond-
ated. This table can be found on the west side wall of           ing time in Jerusalem, we account for the two-hour
Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.                                   time difference. Thus, in Jerusalem, it would be one
Although the inscriptions on the board have faded                o'clock on October 4th. The above examples demon-
with time and information of towns, cities, and nations          strate the HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE's practical use
have been lost, we can still understand its operational          and underline its importance in comprehending time
principles and importance. The trapezoidal board is di-          differences between different locales.
vided into 24 columns and eight horizontal rows, with
each trapezoidal time column representing a quarter of                  12           1 1/4                                     1 3/4                 4         3         7 1/2     7 1/4     8 1/2
an hour (¼ hours). With 24 time periods displayed, the                  11                                                            2
table effectively represents 6 hours (¼ x 24 = 6 hours)          12                    12                                        12                            4         6 1/2     6 1/4     7 1/2
or a quarter of a day. This division of time aligned with        11                   1/4                                       3/4                  3
Father Bonfa's needs (Figure 2.18).
To illustrate its usage, let's consider an example. If the                  10 3/4                                    11 1/2          1                 2 1/2     3 1/2         8         6         7 3/4
sundial in Grenoble indicates 10 ½ hours in the morn-
ing, and we want to know the corresponding time in               9 8 8 1/4 8 8 3/4 9 1/4 9 1/4 9 1/2                       9 3/4 10 10 11 12 12 1/2 1                              3 1/4 4
Jerusalem, located at 32° 53' East of Paris (2 hours 12                                                          1/2
minutes), we consult the table. Since Grenoble's hori-
zontal column does not include 10 ½ hours, we sub-               8 7 7 7 1/4 7 3/4 8 1/4 8 1/4 8 1/2 8 1/2 8 3/4 9 9 10 11 16 1/2 0 1 1/2 2 1/2 3 1/4                                     3 3 1/2 4 3/4
tract 6 hours to obtain 4 ½ hours. Following the vertical                                   1/2                       1/2
column from 4 ½ hours, we find Jerusalem's row at 6 ½
                                                                            6 3/4 7 1/4
Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
                                                                 Figure 2.18 Reconstruction of HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE

                                                                 (Universal clock)

                                                                                                                                                                                             45.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

     CALENDARVM SOC. IESV.
(Calendar of the Society of Jesus)

                                                                               HOROLOG' NOVU IN
                                                                               QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM

                                                                               Figure 2.20 The table of CALENDARVM SOC.
                                                                               IESV. Calendar of the Society of Jesus on the cen-
                                                                               tral east wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.

                                                                               Figure 2.21 The table of HOROLOG' NOVU IN
                                                                               QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM on the central east wall
                                                                               of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.

                                                        The Central East Wall

CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Calendar of Mary)                     CALENDARVM SOC. IESV. Calendar of the Society of
The CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Figure 2.19), popular-            Jesus
ly known as the Marian Calendar, may be viewed on           On the Central East Wall, directly opposite the Calen-
the west side wall. Based on the solar calendar, this cal-  dar of Mary, we find the CALENDARVM SOC. IESV., or
endar highlights the festivals and holidays connected       the Calendar of the Society of Jesus (Figure 2.20). This
to the Virgin Mary. Father Bonfa has meticulously de-       calendar holds special significance regarding the Jesuit
picted these celebrations on the first step of the wall,    order, to which Father Bonfa belonged. Father Bonfa is
where the sunlight's reflection allows us to anticipate     believed to have inscribed the names of notable Jesu-
their occurrence.                                           its on this wall. While the passage of time has taken its
The CALENDARIVM MARIANVM presents several nota-             toll on the inscriptions, two names have endured:
ble holidays, including:                                    St. Francis Xavier, one of the founders of the Society of
· Visitatio (Visitation) on July 2nd                        Jesus, whose feast day is celebrated on December 3rd.
· Assumptio (Assumption) on August 15th                     Father Régis, born on January 31, 1616, later canonized
· Nativitas (Nativity) on September 8th                     in 1737.
· Annuntiatio (Annunciation) on March 25th                  Saint Francis Xavier's feast day, December 3rd, corre-
· Purificatio (Purification) on February 2nd                sponds precisely with his allocated place on the calen-
· Praesentatio (Presentation) on November 21st              dar. Father Bonfa probably inserted these names and
· Conce immaculata (Immaculate Conception) on               dates to recognize and celebrate the accomplishments
                                                            of these illustrious Jesuits. Though the inscriptions on
    December 8th                                            the CALENDARVM SOC. IESV. have faded over time;
The illustration of the CALENDARIVM MARIANVM by             their presence is a tribute to the Society of Jesus' rich
Father Bonfa serves as a practical guide to honoring        history and heritage.
the Virgin Mary.

46.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                                                                                              9                                                      45
                                                                                           78
                                                                                                                                                                   III
                             VIII                                                                                                                                        IV
                          VI VII                                                                                                                                            V VI
                          6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6                                                                                                 6 5 4 3 2 1 12 11 10 9 8 7 6

                                                                                                 10 11                                              3
                                                                                                                                             12

                                                                                                        15 30

                                                                                                        14 29

                                                                                                        13 28

                                                                                                        12 27

                                                                                                        11 26

                                                                                                        10 25

                                                                                                        9 24

                                      IX 8 23
                                                                                                                                       7 22
                                                                                                                                       6 21
                                                                                                                                       5 20

                                      X 4 19                                                                                                           II
                                                                                                           3 18
                                                                                                        2 17

                                                                           1 16

                                      XI XII I

Figure 2.22 Reconstruction of HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO

LUNAE PER SOLEM

HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM                                                                                                            circle 7 and the red spiral curve beginning at XII of
HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM, SOLIS                                                                                                     the great circles. As a result, the moon's position at
PER LUNAM LOCUS ET PER VTRUMQ DIES LUNAE AC                                                                                                     VII o'clock in the morning is shown by the tip of the
HORAE TOTI ORBIS COGNOSCUT showcases Father                                                                                                     arrow. We can see that two circles are required to
Bonfa's ingenious invention for estimating sun-relat-                                                                                           directly read all the hours of a day: one at 24 hours
ed information based on the day of the moon (Figure                                                                                             for the first fifteen days of the moon and one at 24
2.21).                                                                                                                                          hours for the last fifteen days of the moon. Father
The artwork comprises 17 concentric and evenly                                                                                                  Bonfa probably likely drew a large semi-circle at 12
spaced semi-circles enclosing 16 colored zones. It lo-                                                                                          hours for the 30 days of the lunar month to allow for
cates under a horizontal diameter of 10 stair depth (ap-                                                                                        more precise calculations.
proximately 3.5 meters). The color order follows a pat-                                                                                         No intersection between the lunar semi-circle and
tern of red, green, red, blue, and so on. As a result, red                                                                                      the sun's curve:
appears 8 times, green 4 times, and blue 4 times more                                                                                           For example, suppose the moon is 6 days away and
(15 areas would be enough, with 16 semicircles). A thin                                                                                         the sun's hour is III in the morning: the great circle
vertical line divides the artwork in half (Figure 2.22).                                                                                        does not include III in the morning, and the curve
The first circle has the numbers 1-16. Then we read nu-                                                                                         of 3 in the morning that begins from the horizon-
merals in pairs : 2-17, 3-18, 4-19, and so on, up to 15-30                                                                                      tal does not intersect the lunar semi-circle 6. As a
between the last green and red areas.31 The inscription                                                                                         result, we select the III hour of the evening for the
"DIES INEVNTES LVNAE" indicates the beginning of the                                                                                            sun. We proceed as in the first situation, and we get
lunar day, representing the Moon's age. Thus, the color                                                                                         X 1/2 hours in the morning, which we change to X
patches encompass the entire date range, and the cen-                                                                                           1/2 hours in the evening, which is the desired result.
tral red region represents the 15th and 30th days.                                                                                           Determining the time of the sun based on the day
The clock designed by Father Bonfa offers several prac-                                                                                      and time of the moon:
tical applications:                                                                                                                             When the moon is visible and reflects on a mirror,
Determining the moon's position based on the sun's                                                                                              creating a bright spot on a wall, position the arrow's
position:                                                                                                                                       end on the large circle corresponding to the lunar
                                                                                                                                                time to discover the sun's time. Locate the intersec-
   Full moon (1st to 15th day): The lunar semi-circle and                                                                                       tion of the arrow and the semicircle representing the
   the curve of the sun have an intersection.                                                                                                   lunar day, and find the closest spiral curve. The re-
   To determine the time of the moon on February 7,                                                                                             quired solar time is determined based on this curve.
   1984, when the sun is at 12 a.m., consult the table                                                                                          This approach can also calculate the moon's move-
   of epacts, then the NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE                                                                                               ment on the meridian by placing the arrow's end at
   - New Moon Civil Calendar, which reveals that the                                                                                            XII and using the clock as before.
   moon is on its 7th day on February 7, 1984. The ar-
   row is placed at the intersection of the black lunar

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                                                                                                             47.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                                         NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE
                                                                    (New Moon Civil Calendar)

                                                                                                       Figure 2.23 The table of NOVUM
                                                                                                       KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New
                                                                                                       Moon Civil Calendar on the central
                                                                                                       west wall of Grenoble's Reflective
                                                                                                       Sundial.

     The Central West Wall

NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New Moon Civil Cal-            DIES    V                          X   XV  XX  XXV XXIX 30  V   X
endar
To make use of HOROLOGIUM NOVUM (Figure 2.23), it is        LVNAE
essential to understand the moon's position and phases,
including when it is not visible. Father Bonfa addressed    JANV    3                          10  15  20  25  29  30   0   0
this by painting a table of epacts (1674 to 1689) and a
"NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New Moon Civil Cal-           FEBRV   4                          9   14  19  24  28  0    0   0
endar" on the high school wall. The table of epacts and
the lunar calendar serve as valuable references. The us-    MART    5                          10  15  20  25  29  30   0   0
age of the table is explained in the banner placed above
it:                                                         APRIL   4                          9   14  19  24  28  0    0   0

  "Annua lunari jungatur epacta diei, Atternoque omnes      MAIVS   3                          8   13  18  23  27  28   0   0
  terdenos rejice mense, Et collecta diem lunae te summa
                                                            JVNIVS 2                           7   12  17  22  26  0    0   0
                          doceb Join"
 "the lunar day the epact of the year, excluded thirty-one  JVLIVS  1                          6   11  16  21  25  26   31  0
 alternate months and the sum will teach you the day of
                                                            AVGVS   0                          5   10  15  20  24  0    29  0
                           the moon"
Here's how the table is utilized, providing more detail     SEPTEM 28                          3   8   13  18  22  23   28  0
than the listing provides: The top horizontal line shows
the age of the moon, in Roman numerals. The twelve          OCTOBER 27                         3   8   13  18  22  0    27  0
other horizontal lines correspond each to a Gregorian
month. The Arabic numerals in these rows are dates of       NOVEMB 26                          1   6   11  16  20  21   26  0

                                                            DECEMB 25                          30  6   11  16  20  0    25  30

                                                            Figure 2.24 The reconstruction of NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL
                                                            LVNAE - New Moon Civil Calendar

                                                            Figure 2.26 The inscription decorated inside the Reflective
                                                            Sundial in Grenoble.

48.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                     Tables of Epactes

                                                                                      CALENDARIVM REGIVM
                                                                                      (King's Calendar)

Figure 2.25 The table of Epactes on
the east wall of Grenoble's Reflective
Sundial.
Figure 2.28 The table of CALENDARIVM
REGIVM (King's Calendar) on the east
wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.

                                          The East Side Wall

          Tables                          that month (Figure 2.24). By determining    times a difference of one day between
                                          the date on the table, one may calculate    the calculation and a calendar.
      of Epactes since 1984               the age of the moon by adding the epact     Tables of Epactes
                                          of the year given by the table opposite     The epact (Figure 2.25) (Latin: epactae,
Year  Ep Year Ep Yea Ep                   (Figure 2.25). If the date does not appear  from Ancient Greek: (epaktai hmerai)
                                       r  in the table, a correction is made.         = added days) was formerly defined by
 84                                                                                   medieval astronomers as the age of a
 85   27  99              13 14 29           Example: February 7, 1984                phase of the Moon in days on 22 March;
 86                                          moon day given by the table for Feb-     however, under the current Gregorian
 87   8   2000 24 15 10                      ruary 9: X (10)                          calendar, the epact is defined as the age
 88                                          correction for February 7: -2            of the ecclesiastical moon on 1 January.
 89   19  1               5 16 21            epact of the year 1984: 27               Its primary application is in calculating
 90                                          Total: 35                                the date of Easter using computational
 91   0   2               16 17 2            February is an even month; we sub-       methods. It changes from year to year
 92                                          tract 29 from this sum                   (typically by 11 days) due to the discrep-
      11  3               27 18 13           The age of the moon is: 35 - 29 = 6      ancy between the solar year of 365-366
 93                                          The day of the moon = date of the        days and the lunar year of 354-355 days.
      22  4               8 19 24            moon + 1 is:                             On the east stairs, on the second step,
 94                                          6 + 1 = 7 therefore towards the 1st      there is an inscription:
 95   3   5               19 20 5            quarter
 96                                       These Calculations are given for non-                    EPACTAE ANNVAE
 97   14  6               0 21 16         leap years where 30-day moons end in           Post Annum MCMXVIJI (Figure 2.26)
 98                                       odd-numbered months. Hence some-
      25  7               11 22 27

      6   8               22 23 8

      17  9               3 24 19
                          14 25 0
      29  10              25 26 11
                          6 27 22
      10  11              17 28 3

      21  12

      2   13

Figure 2.10 Calendarvm Soc.
Iesv. - Calendar Of the Society
of Jesus

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                              49.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

This indicates the epact value for each year. For exam-             On the left side, you can find Father Bonfa's table
ple, the plaque states that the epact value for the year            of epacts labeled "EPACTAE ANNVAE POST ANNVM
1928 is 8. According to the Church's calculation, the               MCVILXXIV" (Annual Epact since the year 1674). On the
date of the full moon is determined by considering the              right side, there is a table of epacts valid from 1984 to
age of the moon on December 31 of the previous year,                2022(Figure 2.27).
in this case, December 31, 1927. The following is the in-           CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar)
formation that we can know from the table of Epact.                 The CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar) (Figure
· The movement of the moon around the earth is on                   2.28) was established during the reign of Louis XIV, also
                                                                    known as the Sun King. This calendar commemorates
    average 29 1/2 days;                                            significant events during his first reign, such as the War
· Accordingly, by convention, the lunar months that                 of Devolution in 1667 and 1668, as well as his military
                                                                    campaigns in Flanders (Figure 2.29).
    begin with each new moon have alternately 29                    Louis XIV's reign lasted for an impressive 72 years and
    and 30 days.                                                    110 days, making it the longest of any confirmed king
· The first day is the day of the new moon.                         in history. Although Louis XIV's France typified Europe's
· The epact of a year is the age of the moon on the                 period of absolutism, the King surrounded himself with
    eve of January 1 of that year (assuming the first               a diverse range of notable political, military, and cultur-
    moon that ends in January is 30 days old).                      al leaders, including Bossuet, Colbert, Le Brun, Le Nôtre,
· Moon age ranges from 0 to 29 (moon day = age +                    Lully, Mazarin, Molière, Racine, Turenne, and Vauban.
    1).
· The epact of the year 1984 (date of the realization
    of this study by the former students) was 27.

            Nuptiae                      Marriage (1660)                            limbur                       Limburg (1667?)
June Traj.(ectum Mosae)                  Maastricht (1673?)                         Tornaci                      Tournai (1667?)
July expugnation                                                                                                 Douai (1667?)
                                         plug                                       Duaci                        Kortrijk (1667?)
    May     Gravelingae                                                             Cortr.                       Second capture of Besançon
  August                                 Gravelines (1664?)                         2Vesontionis Exp.            Solemn entry of the king in 1674
            Batismum regium                                                                                      Liberation of Maastricht (1676?)
   April    Insulae Expugnato            baptism of the king (1643)                 Trajectum Liberatum          2nd capture of Gray (1674?)
September   Dies natalis delph           Capture of Lille (1667)                    Graiaci Exp 2
            Philiburgi Expug. year 1644  Dauphin's birthday (Laws XIV 5 Sept 1638)                               1st of Gray and Besançon
                                         Capture of Philipsburg, year 1644
 March      Melianoe Deditio: year 1674  Reddition of Mulhouse (29 oct 1674)
October     Voerdenis Liberatum
                                         Liberation of Voerden (11 Oct 1672)

February    Dies natalis delph           birthday of the Dauphin (the great; 1661)  I Graiaci exp I vesontionis
  February  Doloe Exp.                   Capture of Dole (February 14, 1668)
  November  Pacis promulg.               Peace Proclamation

Figure 2.29 The reconstruction of CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar)

Figure 2.27 The inscription Figure 2.31 The inscription             Figure 2.32 The inscription                  Figure 2.33 The inscription

decorated inside the Reflective decorated inside the Reflec-        decorated inside the Reflective decorated inside the Reflective

Sundial in Grenoble.                     tive Sundial in Grenoble.  Sundial in Grenoble.                         Sundial in Grenoble.

50.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Translation of Latin Inscriptions
When visitors enter Grenoble's Reflective Sundial, they are surrounded by an immersive setting filled with nu-
merous Latin writings carefully created by Father Bonfa. These inscriptions serve as detailed elucidations of the
astronomical elements encompassed within this splendid masterpiece. By undertaking a comprehensive study
of these Latin inscriptions, an enhanced comprehension of the sundial's functioning and utilization can be at-
tained (Figure 2.30).

DOMUS COELESTIS                                                      celestial houses
The Ceiling

HIBERNVM                                                             WINTER
AVTVMNVS                                                             FALL
VER                                                                  SPRING
AESTAS                                                               SUMMER
DOMUS COELESTIS                                                      THE HEAVENLY HOUSES
INITIUM AURORAE                                                      START OF THE DAY
FINIS CREPUSCULI                                                     END OF DUSK
ORTUS SOLIS                                                          SUNSET
OCCASUS SOLIS                                                        SUNRISE

The West Wall

AEQUI NOCTIA                                                         Equinox
HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE                                                Universal clock
CALENDARIVM MARIANVM                                                 Calendar of Mary
Nativitas                                                            Nativity
Conce immaculata                                                     Immaculate Conception
Annuntiatio                                                          Annunciation
Purificatio                                                          Purification
Praesentatio                                                         Presentation
Assumptio                                                            Assumption
Visitatio                                                            Visitation

The East Wall

EPACTAE ANNVAE POST ANNVM MCVILXXIV                                  Annual Epact since the year 1674
CALENDARIVM REGIVM                                                   King's Calendar
Nuptiae                                                              Wedding
Limbur                                                               Limburg
Traj.(ectum Mosae)                                                   Maastricht
Expugnatio                                                           socket
Tornaci                                                              Tournai
Duaci                                                                Duai
Cortr.                                                               Kortrijk
2 Vesontionis Exp.                                                   Second capture of Besançon
Gravelingae                                                          Gravelines
Batismum regium                                                      baptism of the king
Trajectum Liberatum                                                  Liberation of Maestricht
Insulae Expugnato                                                    Capture of Lille
Graiaci Exp 2                                                        Gray's 2nd Take
Dies natalis delph                                                   Dauphin's birthday (Laws XIV)
Philiburgi Expug. an 1644                                            Capture of Philipsburg year 1644
Melianoe Deditio : an 1674                                           reissue of Mulhouse (29 oct 1674)
Voerdenis Liberatum                                                  Liberation of Voerden (11 Oct 1672)
Dies natalis delph                                                   birthday of the Dolphin (the big one)
Doloe Exp.                                                           capture of Dole
I Graiaci exp I vesontionis                                          1st capture of Gray and Besançon
Pacis promulg                                                        Peace Proclamation

The West Central Wall

NOVUM KALEDAR CIVILE LVNAE                                           New moon civil calendar

Annua lunari jungatur epacta diei, Atternoque omnes terdenos rejice  Add to the lunar day the epact of the year, exclude thirty-one months out of
mense, Et collecta diem lunae te summa doceb                         two and the sum will teach you the day of the moon

The Central East Wall                                                In the morning, count the hours in red (hours of the moon) and in the
MANE RVBRAS HORAS NVMERES HORAE LVNARES ET VESPERE NIGRAS            evening in black
CALENDARIVM SOC. IESV.                                               Calendar of the Society of Jesus

HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM, SOLIS PER LUNAM LOCUS          New clock in which we know the position of the moon by means of that of
ET PER VTRUMQ DIES LUNAE AC HORAE TOTI ORBIS COGNOSCUT               the sun, the position of the sun by means of that of the moon, and by means
                                                                     of both the days of the moon and the hours of the day. whole world.

                          Figure 2.30 Translation of Latin Inscriptions inside the Reflective Sundial
                          in Grenoble on the central east wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                                    51.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Network Lines of Time Systems:                               · Red color line: Symbolizes the Italian time from
The Reflective Sundial, conceived and designed by                sunset. This line marks the progression of hours
Father Bonfa, exhibits a complex network of intersect-           from sunset onward based on the Italian time sys-
ing lines that enables the collection of diverse time in-        tem.
formation. An inscription (Figure 2.33) on the sundial
reads as follows:                                            · Bold black color line: Marks the limits of the
"GALLE NIGRAM ROMANE RVBRAM FVLVAM QVE BABELE                    Twelve Astrological Houses. It designates the de-
                                                                 marcation points associated with the astrological
   HIC TIBI PINGO HORAM MIXTO DO SIGNA COLORE"                   divisions of the zodiac.
  Translated, it conveys: "I paint for you here the French
time in black, Roman time in red and Babylonian time in      · Mixed colors red and yellow line: Represents the
yellow. I provide you with the signs of the zodiac in mixed      System of Declinations of the Sun. The combined
                                                                 red and yellow line signifies the deviations of the
                            colors."                             sun's path from the celestial equator, enabling
The utilization of various color systems for hourly read-        the determination of the sun's position about the
ings further distinguishes the sundial (Figure 2.34).            Earth's equatorial plane.
These color systems are as follows:
· Black color line: Represents the French hour sys-          Notably, this utilization of the color system for con-
                                                             veying meanings is reminiscent of another reflective
    tem, also known as the astronomical hour system,         sundial located in the village of Saint-Antoine-en-Vi-
    civil time, or equal time.                               enne (or en-Dauphine), France. The similarity in the ap-
· Yellow color line: Painted in yellow and numbered          proach raises an intriguing question regarding if there
    with Arabic numerals, this line signifies the Baby-      were both created by Father Bonfa. However, this re-
    lonian hour since sunrise. It indicates the elapsed      mains an exciting and unresolved.
    time since sunrise according to the Babylonian
    timekeeping tradition.

Figure 2.34 The color palette rep-
resents the time system.

52.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                    5.

      Analyzing the Hours System of
                   the Sundial

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              53.
                                                                                                                                   The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
                                                                                                                                   Grenoble (FR)

                                                                                                                                                        The Signs of The Zodiac -
                                                                                                                                                   System of Declinations of The Sun

                                                                                                                                   The sun rises The sun goes down Introduction about the System of Declinations of The Sun:

                                                                                                                                   June 22 - Sum-                                                              Entry into Cancer The System of Declinations of The Sun is the angular distance be-

                                                                                                                                   mer Solstice                                                                                                         tween the plane of the equator and the Sun's declinations, repre-

                                                                                                                                   May 21 - Gemini                                                                      Leo - July 23                   senting the sun's path concerning the earth's system. In sundials,

                                                                                                                                   April 21 - Taurus                                                     Virgo - August 23                              two specific dates are always shown. Those are June 21 (summer
                                                                                                                                   March 21 - Aries                                                    Libra - September 23                             solstice) and December 21 (winter solstice). These dates coincide
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Scorpio - October 23                             with the Sun's position at its highest and lowest points above the
                                                                                                                                     February 19 -                                                                                                      equator, resulting in maximum and minimum daylight hours. The
                                                                                                                                         Pisces                                                        Sagittarius - Novem-                             Sun's declination undergoes variation throughout the day, yield-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ber 22                                 ing a curvilinear trajectory traced by the luminous point from sun-
                                                                                                                                     January 20 -                                                                                                       rise to sunset, exhibiting a hyperbolic branch. The hyperbolic line
                                                                                                                                        Aquarius                                                        Entering Capricorn

                                                                                                                                    December 21 -
                                                                                                                                    Winter Solstice

                                                                                                                                   Figure 2.35 The table of Zodiac throughout a year. for the summer solstice (June 22) is closest to the window; that
                                                                                                                                                                                      winter (December 23) is the furthest. The bright spot within a year

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zenith                                           is always between these two curves. The representation of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        progression of time in the celestial sphere involves the utilization
                                                                                                                                                                                              22 July  a                                                of the Zodiac. The Zodiac encompasses a belt defined by two par-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        allel circles, positioned at an angular separation of 8°30' on either
                                                                                                                                                                         23 August                             21 June                                  side of the ecliptic. Figure 2.35 illustrates the configuration of the

                                                                                                                                                                cb                                                      ` T.g

                                                                                                                                            North      22 September    eridian                                                       TL.g
                                                                                                                                            Pole                     M
                                                                                                                                                    d                                                                                        South

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20 May

                                                                                                                                                    22 October                                                          _

                                                                                                                                                                A.E

                                                                                                                                                    e                                                                              20 April             Zodiac throughout a year:

                                                                                                                                   North            22 November              Horizon                                      ^                             The Conic Surface of Light and The Projection of The Sun's
                                                                                                                                            TL.a                                                                                                        Movement.
                                                                                                                                               T.a     f                                                                     20 March

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i

                                                                                                                                                                21 December

                                                                                                                                                                             g 20 January h 19 February                                                 The reconstruction of the sun's trajectory necessitates using the

                                                                                                                                   Figure 2.36 Astronomic scheme of the Solar and                                                                       conic surface of light, which can be conceptualized as following
                                                                                                                                   the determination of diurnal lines on a conical dial                                                                 the definition proposed by Riccardo Migliati.32 The intersection
                                                                                                                                   by light cone method.                                                                                                of these conical surfaces with interior spaces of varying shapes

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gives rise to the zodiac or month lines observed on sundials. Con-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sequently, creating a sundial on any surface poses a geometric

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        projection challenge. An angular relationship exists between the

                                                                                                                                   Gemini:         Taurus:                      Aries:                                                       Pisces: line connecting the center of the Celestial sphere and the posi-
                                                                                                                                   May 21          April 21                     March 21                                                     February 19 tion where the sun passes at 12:00 on solstice and equinox days.

Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        This relationship is contingent upon the solar declination, the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        angle formed between the Earth-Sun directrix and the terrestri-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        al equatorial plane. By measuring the inclination of light rays on

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the Earth's equator on a specific date, it becomes apparent that

                                                                                                                                   Aquarius: Sagittarius: Leo:                                                                               Virgo:     this value undergoes gradual changes, ranging from 0° during the

                                                                                                                                   January 20 November July 23                                                                               August 23  equinoxes to a maximum of +23°27' during the summer solstice
                                                                                                                                                  22                                                                                                    and -23°27' on the day of the winter solstice. The conic surface re-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sults from the center of the mirror and the light beam that con-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nect the positions of the sun's movement through time is known

                                                                                                                                   Libra:          Scorpio:                  Capricorn:                                                      Cancer:    as a cone of sunlight or a solar cone (Figure 2.36).
                                                                                                                                   September       October 23                December 21                                                     June 22    The Existing Condition of The Sundial in Grenoble
                                                                                                                                   23                                        Winter Sol-                                                     Summer

                                                                                                                                                                             stice                                                           Solstice   To organize a perpetual Gregorian solar calendar using the Merid-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ian, Father Bonfa drew a network of lines painted in "mud of Paris,"
                                                                                                                                   Figure 2.37 The inscription decorated Zodiac signs                                                                   which indicate the sun's position in the signs of the Zodiac. It is
                                                                                                                                   inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.

                                                                                                                                   54.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M.G

important to note that the accuracy of these lines may deviate by a                                                                                                                              _ - c           T.a
margin of 1 or 2 days from the actual astronomical positions, as the                                                                                                                                    ` - b
Zodiac corresponds to a division of the ecliptic circle that remains
independent of the calendar system (Figure 2.36).                                                                                                                                                                          M.G

· The Symbol of each Zodiac is placed on the line's starting point                                                                                                                          M.G M.G
    where the sun could illuminate that sign.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T.a

· In the lower part of the ceiling, there are additional lines colors                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ` - b
    in red that correspond to December 8 - the Immaculate Con-                                                                                                                                                                                                         _ - c
    ception.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ^ - d
During the period spanning from March 20 to 22, the luminous
spot of the Sun traverses a straight path within the sign of Aries                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
from morning to night (Figure 2.38). In contrast, the paths associ-                                                                                                                                         i - e
ated with the other Zodiac signs assume the shape of hyperbolic
arcs. Each curve line represents two Zodiac signs, except for theXrefJ:\2018\18-019_BitexcoSalesGallery\B.DESIGN\B200CAD\003-BASICDESIGNSUBMISSION\A-CADFILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg  M.G      h - f
first and the last, which correspond to the summer and winter                                                                                                                                    T.g
solstices. Notably, a series of allegorical figures adorn the sundial,
depicting the curves of the Zodiac signs (Figure 2.37). These obser-                                                                                                                        Figure 2.38 The projection of solar cone of the
vations, conducted between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m., offer the highest                                                                                                                            system of declinations on the interior space
accuracy. The curve lines, accompanied by inscriptions denoting                                                                                                                             during the period spanning from March 20 to
the months of the Gregorian calendar, serve as precise reference                                                                                                                            22.
points for determining the day of the month. These explanations
demonstrate that the Meridian is a perpetual Gregorian calendar                                                                                                                             Figure 2.39 Orthogonal projections of the sys-
that operates automatically. However, at the staircase's ceiling                                                                                                                            tem of declinations of the Sun based on the Ap-
higher points, the light rays do not reach the ceiling in winter.                                                                                                                           pendix A - the Sun's declination in a year.

The Projection of The System of Declinations of The Sun - The                                                                                                                               Figure 2.40 The intersection between the sys-
Signs of The Zodiac of Celstial Sphere on The Interior Space                                                                                                                                tem of declinations of the sun with the staircase.
                                                                                                                                                                                            Orange lines: System of declinations of the sun
The System of Declinations of the Sun can be identified and rep-                                                                                                                            generated by the ideal celestial.
resented on a celestial sphere by depicting orbitals resembling                                                                                                                             Orange Surface: The conic surface of light with-
light cones. This system comprises a collection of cones that share                                                                                                                         in a year.
a common vertex and axis of rotation, horizontally inclined at an
angle of  with respect to the north. The value of  corresponds to
the latitude of Grenoble, specifically  = 45.1885°.

The plane traversing the equator is designated as the 0° point to
establish a reference origin (Figure 2.38). Subsequently, the cones
extend along arcs inclined to the equator at various angles, name-
ly +/-11.4°, +/-20°, and +/-23°27' (representing the tropical/solstice
positions), as outlined in the Figure 2.39. These angles correspond
to the relatively constant declination values of the Sun at specific
locations throughout the year. Notably, these four distinct eclip-
tic points and the corresponding periods when the Sun occupies
these positions are commonly referred to as the equinoxes and
solstices. Thus, along the surface of the celestial sphere, the Sun
moves in day and year orbits. The Sun, in its motion on the eclip-
tic, passes through the constellations known as the zodiac signs,
which together form the Zodiac (Figure 2.40). The lines of the Sun's
declinations inside the reflective sundial result from the intersec-
tion of the room surfaces with the light cones (Figure 2.41).

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              55.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                     The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Generate the Declina-
                                         tions of The Sun Inside the Inner Space of a Reflected Sundial.

The System of Declinations of the Sun can be identified by light cones. The plane at the equator is the 0° point - reference origin. The
other cones inclined to the equator at: 11, 20, and 23 degrees. The lines of the Sun's declinations inside the reflective sundial are the
intersection of the room surfaces with the light cones.

56.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox
L - Limits of the sundial
T.L  - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
T.L  - Lunar Tropic of Cancer
T.  - Tropic of Capricorn (Dec 21)
T.  - Tropic of Cancer (June 21)
 -  - Aquarius - Sagittarius (Jan 20
- Nov 22)
 -  - Pisces - Scorpio (Feb 19 - Oct
22)
 -  - Aries - Libra (Equinoxes Mar
20 - Sep 22)
 -  - Taurus - Virgo (Apr. 20 - Aug.
23)
 -  - Gemini - Leo (May 20 - July 22)
PE - Plane of the Ecliptic
A.E - Axis of the Ecliptic
 - Aries Point
S - Limit of polar stars always visible in
the northern hemisphere
Orange lines: System of declinations
of the sun generated by the ideal ce-
lestial.
Orange dash lines: System of decli-
nations of the sun found on the stair-
case.

Figure 2.41 The analysis of system of decli-  57.
nations of the sun - the signs of the zodiac
inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

              French Hours Dials

Figure 2.42 The inscription decorated Roman                                                                  Introduction To the French Hour System:
numerals inside the reflective sundial in Greno-
ble.                                                                                                         The astronomical hour system is also known as the French hour
                                                                                                             system (civil time or equal time). It tells the solar time as we are us-
                                                                                                        M.G  ing today on modern watches. The term "Astronomical" originates
                                                                                                             from the application of the hourly notation similar to the notation
               I   2                                                                                         used by astronomers. It provides twenty-four fixed equal periods
          M.G            1 3 12                                                                              of the day and is divided into two cycles every twelve hours. The
                          M.G                                                                                French hour system consists of 24 hours a day starting at mid-
              XII                                                                                            night, used in France around 1500. They are called the French hour
                   3             12                                                                          system to distinguish it from the Italic time adopted by Italy and
I                                                                                                            other countries.
                   4 M.G             11
                                                                                                             The Existing Condition of The Sundial in Grenoble
                                         10
                                                                                                             The set of hour markers are curves painted "mixto colore", i.e. in a
                             III IV 9                                                                        dark gray or "Paris mud", according to Abbé Gattel.33 Thinner lines
                   II                                                                                        indicate the half-hours make obtaining more precision in read-
                                                                                                             ing the time possible. The numbering is in Roman numerals (VIII,
                                                                             8                               IX, X, XI, XII for the morning hours and I, II, III, IV for the evening
                                                                                                             hours) and Arabic (Figure 2.42). These lines represent the direction
                                 X IX VIII                                                                   of movement of the sun's bright spot on the same day, especially
                                                                                                             during the winter and summer solstices, as well as at the time of
M.G XII XI                                                                                                   the equinoxes.

Figure 2.43 The projection of the French hour                                                                The west wall of the first step shows the morning time; The vertical
system of the celestial sphere on the interior                                                               wall to the east of the second step represents evening time. The
space during the period 12:00 in a day.                                                                      small wall in the middle shows contrasting solar time/moon time
                                                                                                             charts and other spreadsheets. The time is read like a typical gno-
Figure 2.44 Orthogonal Projections of French                                                                 mon dial. The position of the bright spot between the two near-
                                                                                                             est lines is evaluated relatively intuitively. Whereas with a regular
Hours Dials.                                                                                                 dial, the hours from VI in the morning to XII will go downward.
                                                                                                             Then here, due to the reflection, on the contrary, these hours go
58.                                                                                                          up again. The XII line or meridian indicating the location of the
                                                                                                             Grenoble meridian has been carefully drawn. It is used to place the
                                                                                                             dials and clocks.

                                                                                                             The Projection of The Hour Angle of Celestial Sphere on The In-
                                                                                                             terior Space

                                                                                                             An ideal celestial sphere has been constructed, specifically de-
                                                                                                             signed to correspond to the latitude of Grenoble. This celestial
                                                                                                             sphere incorporates a network of hour lines known as French hour
                                                                                                             lines, formed through the intersection of the celestial sphere and
                                                                                                             planes of light (Figure 2.43). These planes of light are generated
                                                                                                             by the Sun and the North Star's axis. It is important to note that
                                                                                                             the tilt angle of the north pole axis varies following the specific
                                                                                                             latitude of the sundial's location. In the case of Grenoble, this tilt
                                                                                                             angle is set at 45.1885°, aligning with its corresponding latitude (
                                                                                                             = 45.1885°) (Figure 2.44). The celestial sphere's astronomical hour
                                                                                                             system is identified by applying a fundamental astronomical pa-
                                                                                                                                   Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
                                                                                                                                   Università Iuav di Venezia

                                                                                                                                                                                             90°                         rameter, known as the Sun's hour angle (H), as depicted in (Figure 2.45). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         hour angle is conventionally measured from 0 degrees to +180 degrees in
                                                                                                                                                       60° 21 22 23 24 1 2 3 60°                                         the westward direction and from 0 to -180 degrees in the eastward direction.
                                                                                                                                                        20 P 4                                                           A value of 0 degrees corresponds to the Sun's position on the meridian, while
                                                                                                                                        40° 19                                                        5 40°              the angle at dawn or sunset is referred to as the semi-diurnal arc H0.

                                                                                                                                                18                                                         6

                                                                                                                                   20°             17                                                 8 7 L 20°

                                                                                                                                                      16

                                                                                                                                                        15 14 13 12 11 10 920°40°60°80°
                                                                                                                                   0° Z 0°

                                                                                                                                   20°                                                                              20°

                                                                                                                                                   E               L                                                     The relationship between the semi-diurnal arc H0 and the geographical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         latitude () and the declination of the Sun () is governed by the following
                                                                                                                                        40°                                                                    40°       equation:

                                                                                                                                                           T.L                                                                                           cos H0 = -tan  * tan 

                                                                                                                                   Figure 2.4650° The Sun's ho6u0°r angle H.

                                                                                                                                   It is measured al9o0° ng the Celestial

                                                                                                                                   Equator from its culmination in the

                                                                                                                                   south.

                                                                                                                                                                         Z                                               To establish a correspondence between angular variations in the hour an-
                                                                                                                                                   E                                                                     gle H and the passage of time, it is postulated that a 15-degree corresponds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to one hour, given that the Sun completes its 360-degree trajectory over
                                                                                                                                                               10  11 12 1                        2S                     24 hours (Figure 2.46, 2.47). Therefore, these light planes are then rotated

                                                                                                                                                          9                                       3

                                                                                                                                                    8 Hour p.m 4

                                                                                                                                                7                                                        5

                                                                                                                                                6                                            P6                          around the north pole in multiples of 15 degrees, starting from the meridian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         plane that represents 12:00 (Figure 2.48). The intersections formed between
                                                                                                                                                5                                                     7                  the celestial sphere, and these light planes serve as the hour lines within the

                                                                                                                                                    4                             Hour a .m           8
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hour a .m
                                                                                                                                                          3                                       9

                                                                                                                                                   H 2 1 10 12 11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         reflective sundial (Figure 2.49). Specifically, the astronomical hour lines, also

XrefJ:\2018\18-019_BitexcoSalesGallery\B.DESIGN\B200CAD\003-BASICDESIGNSUBMISSION\A-CADFILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg known as French hours, are established through the intersection between

        Figure 2.46 The Sundial Quadrant

      in Orthogonal Projection of The the interior surfaces of the sundial and the aforementioned planes of light

                                                                                                                                   Azimuthal Sphere.                                                                     (Figure 2.50).

                                                                                                                                                                                             90°                                                                         Legend :

                                                                                                                                                       60° 21 22 23 24 1 2 3 60°                                                                                         Black dash lines:
                                                                                                                                                       20 P 4                                                                                                            French hours found on
                                                                                                                                        40° 19                                                        5 40°                                                              the staircase.

                                                                                                                                                18                                                          6

                                                                                                                                   20°             17                                                 8 7 L 20°

                                                                                                                                                    16

                                                                                                                                   20°                  15 14 13 12 11 10 940°60° 80°
                                                                                                                                   0° Z 0°

                                                                                                                                   20°                                                                              20°

                                                                                                                                                   E               L

                                                                                                                                        40°                                                                    40°

                                                                                                                                                   T.L 

                                                                                                                                                       60°                                            60°

                                                                                                                                                                                             90°

                                                                                                                                   Figure 2.47 The Sundial Quadrant

                                                                                                                                   in Orthogonal Projection of The

                                                                                                                                   Celestial Sphere.

                                                                                                                                                                                 Z
                                                                                                                                                       E

                                                                                                                                                               10  11 12 1                        2S

                                                                                                                                                          9                                       3

                                                                                                                                                   8 Hour p.m 4

                                                                                                                                                7                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                6                                            P6

                                                                                                                                                5                                                        7

                                                                                                                                                   4                                                  8

                                                                                                                                                          3                                       9

                                                                                                                                                   H 2 1 10 12 11

Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg

                                                                                                                                   Figure 2.48 The French time lines                                                     Figure 2.49 The Existing French hour system
                                                                                                                                   result from the intersection of light                                                     inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.
                                                                                                                                   planes with the staircase.
                                                                                                                                   Black lines: French hours generat-                                                                                                    59.
                                                                                                                                   ed by the ideal celestial.
                                                                                                                                   Gray surface: The Plane of light
                                                                                                                                   within a day.

                                                                                                                                   Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                     The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Generate the French
                                           Hour System Inside the Inner Space of a Reflected Sundial.

French hour lines, formed through the intersection of the celestial sphere and planes of light. These light planes are then rotated around
the north pole in multiples of 15 degrees, starting from the meridian plane that represents 12:00. The astronomical hour lines, also
known as French hours, are established through the intersection between the interior surfaces and the planes of light.

60.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox
L - Limits of the sundial
T.L - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
S - Limit of polar stars always visible in
the northern hemisphere

Black lines: French hours generated
by the ideal celestial.

Black dash lines: French hours found
on the staircase.

Figure 2.50 The analysis of French Hours    61.
Dials inside the Reflective Sundial in
Grenoble.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

            Babylonian Hours Dials

Figure 2.51 Orthogonal Projections of Babylo-                                                        Introduction to the Babylonian hour system:
nians Hours Dials
                                                                                                     The Babylonian time system was standard in Europe around
                                                    90°                                              1300, except in some Mediterranean regions where the Italian
                                                                                                     time system was normal. A millennium ago, they believed that
                602°0 60° 21 2222 23 24 1 2 23 2940° 1 2 3 460° 60°                                  midnight was not a specific hour and there was no need to be-
     40° 19 20 21                                   P 3 P 4 5 40°                                    gin counting at such an ambiguous moment. Instead, two other
                                                                                                     instants are much better candidates for serving as time origins,
     40° 19                                                                 5 40°                    namely sunrise and sunset. These choices led to the Babylonian
          18                                                                     6                   (or Babylonic) hours system: Babylonian hours are equinoctial
                                                                                                     hours counted from sunrise.
20° 1187                                                                    7 8 7 L 6 20° 20°
             1716                                                                                    Taking up the old habit of the Babylonians, counting the hours
20°                                                                         98 L                     begins at sunrise. The interval between two sunrises is divided
                16 15                                                                                into 24 equal hours, numbered here in Arabic numerals. They are
0° 15 1414 1313 12 11 1Z2 11 10 0° 10 9                                                              not typical dial information. Indeed, the Babylonian time system
                                           80° 80°                                                   is usually found with hour parameters dramatically boosted by
                                                                                                     sophisticated time grids. Is that why the Grenoble dial designer
                         60° 60°                                                                     decided to display Babylon's time?
         40° 40°
20° 20°                                                                                              The existing condition of the sundial in Grenoble
0° Z 0°
                                                                                                     The Babylonian and French knowledge of time provided a way
20°                                                                                             20°  to find sunrise and sunset times. They tell us how long the sun
                                                                                                     has risen and calculate how many more hours it will last. Inside
20°          E            L                                                                     20°  Grenoble's reflecting sundial, these lines, painted yellow and
                                                                                                     numbered with Arabic numerals, represent the Babylonian hour
             E            L                                                                          since sunrise. It indicates the elapsed time since sunrise accord-
                                                                                                     ing to the Babylonian timekeeping tradition. Furthermore, four
     40°                                                                                   40°       dotted lines on ceiling 2 begin with dawn (INITIVM AURORAE),
                                                                                                     dusk (OCCASVS SOLIS), sunrise (ORTVS SOLIS), and the conclu-
     40° T.L                                                                               40°       sion of sunset (FINISH CREPVSCVLI) for certain times of the year
                                                                                                     (Figure 2.51).
             T.L 
                60°                                                         60°                      The Babylonian time system lines are straight lines produced
                60° 90° 60°                                                                          using a procedure similar to that of ancient times. J. de Rey
                                                    90°                                              Pailhade34 established a reconciliation of Babylonian time and
                                                                                                     French time for the summer solstice, equinox, and winter solstice
Figure 2.53 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal                                                       for the latitude of Grenoble (Figure 2.52). It is easier to establish
                                                                                                     since the Babylonian and French hours are equal.
Projection of The Azimuthal Sphere.
                                                                                                     The Babylonians Hour System on A Celestial Sphere
                                                    Z
                                                    Z                                                This is how we identify The Babylonians Hour System on a ce-
          E                                                                                          lestial sphere. Because Babylonian hours are equinoctial hours
             E                                                                                       counted from sunrise, the Babylonian hour is 0:00 at sunrise.
                                                                                                     Babylonian dials provide essential information regarding the
                          11                        12 1                    2S                       elapsed number of hours since dawn. Consequently, the Baby-
                    10 11                           12 1                    2S                       lonian Hour System comprises 24 distinct great circles, with the
                9 10                                                                                 first circle representing the horizon, intersecting the celestial
                 9                                       Hour Hour pp .m.m       3                   equator.
             8                                                                   3
             8                                       P
                                                     P                              4
          7                                                                         4
          7
                                                                                       5
          6                                                                            5
          6
                                                                                        6
          5               Hour a .m                                                    6
          5               Hour a .m
                                                                                       7
             44                                                                       7
                                                                                     8
             H     3   2                                                             8
                   3                                                              9
                                                                                 9
             H          21   1                      12   11                 10
                                                         11                 10

                                                    12

Figure 2.54 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal
Projection of The Celestial Sphere

62.
                                                                Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
                                                                Università Iuav di Venezia

                                                                                              M.G                                                       Starting from the horizon, they create 24 circles on the celestial sphere, al-
                                                                                                                                                      6 ways visible in the northern hemisphere (Figure 2.53, 2.54). These circles, in
                                                                              7            9 10 8 9 8
                                                                6                                            M.G 7                                      reality, are generated through the rotation of the horizon plane around the
                                                                                                                                                        polar axis in increments of 15 degrees (Figure 2.55). The lines of this system
                                                                    M.G                    6 8M.G 8 7                                                   are caused by planes with a rotation angle of 15 degrees and an inclination of
                                                                    6                                                       6                           45.1885 degrees concerning the north pole axis. The rotation axis is aligned
                                                                                                                                                        with the north direction and inclined at an angle of 45.1885 degrees relative
                                                                                     5     7                                                            to the horizon, precisely mirroring the latitude of Grenoble (Figure 2.56).

                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                           63

                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                    2  1

                                                                                           3

                                                                M.G                     4

                                                                                                                                                      The projection of the Babylonian's hour system of the celestial sphere on
                                                                                                                                                      the interior space:

                                                                Figure 2.55 The Babylonians Time                                                      The projection of the Babylonian Hour System, originating from the celestial
                                                                Lines Results from the Intersec-                                                      sphere, onto the interior space of a sundial has been meticulously recreat-
                                                                tion of the Planes Surface with The                                                   ed to align with Grenoble's latitude. As mentioned above, Babylonian hour
                                                                Staircase at 6:00.                                                                    lines inside the sundial in Grenoble are established through the intersection

SIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg                                                                                        between the interior surfaces of the sundial and the rotating plane's surface

                                                                                                                                                      starting from the horizon plane. Figure 2.57 visually depicts this process, il-

                                                                                                                                                      lustrating the intricate relationship between the Babylonian Hour System,

                                                                                                                                                      the sundial's interior space, and the rotating planes of light.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Legend :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Yellow dash lines:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Babylonian hours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       found on the staircase

                                                                Figure 2.56 The intersection be-                                                      Figure 2.52 The Existing Babylonian hour sys-
                                                                tween Babylonians' Time planes                                                        tem inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.
                                                                with the staircase and the starting
                                                                0:00 at sunrise on the horizon.                                                                                                                        63.
                                                                Yellow lines: Babylonian hours
                                                                were generated by the ideal celes-
                                                                tial.
                                                                Yellow surface: 24 planes starting
                                                                at 0:00 when sunrise on the hori-
                                                                zon.

                                                                Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                   The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Generate the Babylonian
                                           Hour System Inside the Inner Space of a Reflected Sundial.

Babylonian hours are counted from sunrise. The lines of this system are caused by planes with a rotation angle of 15 degrees around the
north pole starting from the horizon plane. Babylonian hour lines inside the sundial in Grenoble are established through the intersec-
tion between the interior surfaces and the rotating plane's surface.

64.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox
L - Limits of the sundial
T.L - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
S - Limit of polar stars always visible
in the northern hemisphere

Yellow lines: Babylonian hours were
generated by the ideal celestial.

Yellow dash lines: Babylonian hours
found on the staircase

Figure 2.57 The analysis of Babylonian        65.
Hours Dials inside the Reflective Sundial in
Grenoble.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

               Italian Hours Dials

Figure 2.58 Orthogonal Projections of Italian     Introduction to the Italian time system:
Hours Dials
                                                  It was not the hours of ancient Rome used for the Christian lit-
                                                  urgy, which varied according to the seasons. Italian hours are
                                                  equinoctial hours counted from the last sunset. The Italian hour
                                                  is 0:00 at sunset. The interval between two sunsets is divided
                                                  into 24 equal hours in-scribed in Arabic numerals on the dial and
                                                  called Italic hours in treatises on gnomonic (the art of building
                                                  sundials). In the mid-1300s, the Italian time system was used.
                                                  It specifies the number of hours until sunset (Hour of Vespers):
                                                  for the benefit of public life, knowing the hours of light that re-
                                                  mained to end a working day was essential so that one would
                                                  not be left in the dark outside the town or on the streets, which
                                                  were not very pleasant at the time. The Italian time system was
                                                  widespread, particularly in the peninsula and Catholic nations,
                                                  and it was used until the second half of the eighteenth century
                                                  when the modern system superseded it. Today, it is mainly pre-
                                                  served in the repair of antique dials.

                                                  The existing condition of the sundial in Grenoble

                                                   In the context of the sundial in Grenoble, Father Bonfa imple-
                                                      mented a distinct inscription, "ROMANE RVBRAM" (red for
                                                          Rome) (Figure 2.58), symbolizing the utilization of Italian
                                                             hour lines. These hour lines exhibit a symmetrical con-
                                                                 struction, commencing from sunset (Figure 2.59).
                                                                    They are also great circles obtained by rotating
                                                                        the horizon plane around the polar axis. The
                                                                            coexistence of the Italian and Babylonian
                                                                               hour systems within the sundial com-
                                                                                   ple-ments one another, enabling the
                                                                                      determination of post-sunset and
                                                                                          post-sunrise hour counts. Re-

                                                                                                       M.G

                                                        19                      19 20 18
                                                                                                 M.G
                                                            M.G  18                                    15
                                                                                          16 17 17 16       14
                                                                                            18 M.G
                                                            20
                                                                       21      1918 22 19 16
                                                                                                 17

                                                                    20                                                  14
                                                                 M.G           18 17 16 15

                                                                                             18

                                                                           19

Legend :                                                                                                                                                               18
Red dash lines: Italian hours found
on the staircase.                                            Figure 2.62 The Italian Time
                                                             Lines Results from the Inter-
Figure 2.59 The Existing Italian hour system in-             section of the Planes Surface
side the reflective sundial in Grenoble.                     with The Staircase at 18:00
                                                             (6:00 Babylonian Time).
66.
                                                  Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg
                              Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
                              Università Iuav di Venezia

                                                                                               90°

                                               60° 21 22 23902°4 1 2 3 60°                                                       markably, the sundial's accuracy remains consistent throughout
                                            60° 20 22 23 24 1 2                                         604°                     the year, irrespective of the varying duration of daylight between
                                        40° 1290  21                                             P  3   4 5 40°                  winter and summer seasons. This temporal reliability is achieved
                                                                                                                                 by employing the Italian and Babylonian hour systems. The
                                      40° 1918 P                                                           5 6 40°               number of Babylonian hours (n) coincides with the number of
                                                                                                                                 Italian hours (n + 12) at the equator, establish-ing a fundamental
                                   20°  18 17                                                                  67       20°      correlation between the two systems. Reading time in the sun-
                               20°          16                                                                 8L     20°
                                        17                                                                    7
                                 0°       16 15 14                                                         9       L       0°
                              0°                                                                       10 8             0°
                                                         13 12 11 9
                                               15  14 13 12 Z 11 10

                                                                                       80°  Z
                                                                                 80°

                                                                    60°
                                                               60°

                                                     40°
                                               40°

                                           20°
                                      20°

                                 20°                                                                      60°               20°  dial is facilitated using three different temporal systems: French,
                                                                                                        60°              20°     Babylonian, and Italian hours. These systems enable straightfor-
                              20° E L                                                                                40°         ward calculations of significant material events:35
                                                                                                                   40°           · Sunrise: (F -- B),
                                        40° E L                                                                                  · Sunset of the previous day: (24 -- [I -- F]),
                                                T.L                                                                              · The time during which the Sun is above the horizon: (24 --

                                    40°                                                                                              [I -- B])
                                            T.L 60°                                                                              F: French hour

                                            60°                                                90°

                                                                                            90°

                              Figure 2.60 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal
                              Projection of The Azimuthal Sphere.

                                                                  Z                                                              B: Babylonian hour
                                           E                                                                                     I: Italian hour

                                                              Z
                                        E

                                              8             11 12 1                                 2S                           Furthermore, the formula F = (B + I)/2 substantiates the intersec-
                                               9       10                                                3                       tion of red and yellow lines on a black line within the sundial. This
                                           87      9 11 12 1                                                                     intriguing relationship implies that if the Babylonian (B) and Ital-
                                        76         10 Hour p.m 2                                      S4                         ian (I) hours are represented as integers, the French hour (F) will
                                                                                                      3                          be an integer or an integer and a half. The interconnectedness of
                                        65                                  Hour p.m
                                                                                                         45
                                                                    P
                                                                 P                                          56

                                                         Hour a .m                                          67
                                                              Hour a .m
                                        54                                                                    78                 these hour systems adds to the sundial's functionality and com-
                                                                                                                                 prehensiveness, enhancing the ease of time calculations and in-
                                        4          3                                                    98                       terpretations.

                                            H         2                                             10                           The projection of the Italian hour system of the celestial sphere
                                             3           1 12 11 9

                                        H 2 1 10 12 11

00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg

                              Figure 2.61 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal on the interior space

                              Projection of The Celestial Sphere                                                                 This is how we identify the Italian time system on a celestial

                                                                                                                                 sphere. The Italian time system is obtained by flipping the Baby-

                                                                                                                                 lon dial 180° along the x-axis: this dial divides the day into 24 sec-

                                                                                                                                 tions, beginning with the numbering at sunset (Figure 2.60, 2.61,

                                                                                                                                 2.62). Hours are usually displayed by Roman numerals (although,

                                                                                                                                 in this case, Arabic numerals), and the hour mark-ers running

                                                                                                                                 around the dial terminate with XXIV hour on the horizon. We

                                                                                                                                 recreated an ideal celestial sphere associated with Greonle's lati-

                                                                                                                                 tude. They create 24 semicircles from the hori-zon, always visible

                                                                                                                                 in the northern hemisphere. This is how we identify the Italian

                                                                                                                                 time system on a celestial sphere. The Italian time system is ob-

                                                                                                                                 tained by flipping the Babylon dial 180° along the x-axis: this dial

                                                                                                                                 divides the day into 24 sections, beginning with the numbering

                                                                                                                                 at sunset (Figure 2.63).

                              Figure 2.63 The intersection between Italian                                                       If multiples of 15° rotate the meridian plane, it cuts the sphere at
                              Time planes with the staircase and the starting                                                    the Italian hour lines. These dials are usually made of a vast ring
                              0:00 at sunset on the horizon.                                                                     along the equator. Figure 2.64 visually depicts this process, illus-
                              Red lines: Italian hours were generated by the                                                     trating the intricate relationship between the Italian Hour Sys-
                              ideal celestial.                                                                                   tem, the sundial's interior space, and the rotating planes of light.
                              Red surface: 24 planes starting at 0:00 when
                              sunset is on the horizon.

                              Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                                                     67.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                           The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Generate the Italian Hour System
                                                  Inside the Inner Space of a Reflected Sundial.

The Italian hours are counted from the last sunset. The lines of this system are caused by planes with a rotation angle of 15 de-
grees around the north pole starting from the horizon plane. Italian hour lines inside the sundial in Grenoble are established
through the intersection between the interior surfaces and the rotating plane's surface.

68.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox
L - Limits of the sundial
T.L - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
S - Limit of polar stars always visible
in the northern hemisphere

Red lines: Italian hours were gener-
ated by the ideal celestial.

Red dash lines: Italian hours found
on the staircase.

Figure 2.64 The analysis of Italian Hours Dials  69.
inside the Reflective Sundial in Grenoble.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

         Twelve Astrological Houses
            - The Celestial Houses

Figure 2.66 Orthogonal Projections of Twelve       Introduction to Twelve Astrological Houses:
Astrological Houses
                                                   The Twelve Astrological Houses, also known as the Celestial Hous-
                                                   es, represent a fundamental concept within astrology. These
                                                   houses are mathematical divisions, each spanning 30 degrees.
                                                   The celestial sphere, with its unit circle of 360 degrees, symbolical-
                                                   ly represents the expansive heavens. Astrologers construct horo-
                                                   scopes by considering the positions of celestial bodies, primarily
                                                   in two distinct contexts. Firstly, they analyze the locations of these
                                                   bodies within the various signs of the Zodiac, often referred to as
                                                   the Celestial Houses of the Sun. Secondly, they observe the posi-
                                                   tions of celestial bodies with the horizon of a specific geographic
                                                   location, known as the celestial Houses relative to the horizon.

                                                   During the late 17th century, astrology remained a subject of
                                                   study and exploration. As previously mentioned, the author of The
                                                   Sundial referred to the positions of the zodiac signs. In astrology,
                                                   the celestial sphere is divided into twelve distinct houses, each
                                                   corresponding to a two-hour solar time interval.

                                                    The existing condition of the sundial in Grenoble

                                                         The sundial in Grenoble, as previously described by Father
                                                            Bonfa, features inscriptions indicating the positions of
                                                                the celestial Houses along the walls and ceilings of the
                                                                   staircase (Figure 2.65).

                                                                        These inscriptions provide valuable informa-
                                                                            tion regarding the alignment of the celestial
                                                                               Houses with the Grenoble horizon at spe-
                                                                                   cific times throughout the day (Figure
                                                                                      2.66). We read the following inscrip-
                                                                                          tions on Plate 2, West wall, on the
                                                                                             left DOMVS COELI nearly 8 am
                                                                                                 going up.

Legend :                                           XII. DOMVS COELES be-
Blue dash lines:                                   tween 9 and 10 am;
Twelve astrological                                XI. DOMVS COELESTIS right
houses found on the                                from 10 o'clock.
staircase.                                         On Plate 1, on the ceiling:
                                                   X. DOMVS COELESTIS West
Figure 2.65 The Existing Astrological Houses sys-  of the Meridian;
tem inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.     IX. DOMVS COELESTIS to
                                                   the East.
                                                   Take Plate 5, East wall of the
                                                   second ramp; one sees:
                                                   VIII. DOMVS COELESTIS East
                                                   of 2 p.m.;

                                                   VIIII. DOMVS COELESTIS.

70.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

      House Numbers                         Celestial House in Hours                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Zenith

I.    Maison de la vie                between 4 and 6 a.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TIS 11                                               Equator
                                      between 2 and 4 a.m.
II.   Maison de richesses             between midnight and 2 a.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIIII.DOM    COELES     MVS CO ELESTIS                         10       23.26°
                                      between 10 p.m. and midnight
                                      between 8 and 10 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VS 12                                                 23.26
                                      between 6 and 8 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   °
                                      between 4 and 6 p.m.
III.  Maison de frères                between 2 and 4 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      North                      IX.DO
                                      between noon and 2 a.m. evening
                                      between 10 a.m. and noon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pole             OELESTIS                     LESTIS COE 9                                                              South
                                      between 8 a.m. and 10 a.m.
IV.   Maison de parents               between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIII.D OMVS C                              OMVS 30°
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X.D
V.    Maison de enfants                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 ELESTIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O                                                  OELESTIS
VI.   Maison de santé                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MVS C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VII.DO                                       OMVS C 8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         XI.D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 45.19°
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ecliptic
VII. Maison de mariage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                        OELESTIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                North                                                                         MVS C
VIII. Maison de mort                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XII.DO

IX.   Maison de piété                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7

X.    Maison de offices                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3 Horizon

XI.   Maison de amis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
XII. Maison de bienfails
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5

Figure 2.67 The table of The Houses of The Celestial Houses inside the reflective Figure 2.68 Astronomic Representation of The

sundial in Grenoble by J. de Rey Pailhade.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Celestial Houses on The Celestial Sphere.

These inscriptions provide an explicit delineation of the celestial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M.G
Houses associated with the sundial in Grenoble. J. de Rey Pailhade
further emphasizes the importance of dividing the sky according to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M.G
a table of the positions of the celestial Houses.36 By employing this
table, determining the House in which the Sun resides becomes a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M.G IX.DOM X.DOMVS C VS OE C L O E E S L T E IS STIS TIS       M.G
straightforward process (Figure 2.67). It is simple to use this table.
When the sun reaches a point on the Meridian, the celestial House                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ELESTIS        COELES
in which it is read immediately. When the Sun is down, we refer-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OMVS CO II.DOMVS          LESTIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIIII.D          V VS I COE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg                                       II.DOM                                     OELESTIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
ence the Sundial's well-regulated clock, then look in the chart to
see which House the Sun is in.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         XI.DOMV T S IS C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OELES
The Projection of The Celestial Houses in Celestial Sphere on The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MVS E C LI
Interior Space                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         XII.DO           VS CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DOM
The projection of the Celestial Houses onto the interior space can                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M.G
be achieved by delineating their presence on a celestial sphere.
This method allows for identifying and understanding the Celes-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 2.69 The Celestial Houses Lines Results
tial Houses within the context of astrology. The generation of these                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from the Intersection of the Planes Surface
houses involves using a series of planes, each characterized by a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               with The Staircase during 12:00 in a day.
rotation angle of 30° and a rotation axis aligned towards the north
(Figure 2.68).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 2.70 The intersection between The Ce-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lestial Houses' planes and the staircase.
During the late 17th century, astrology remained a subject XrefJ:\2018\18-019_BitexcoSalesGallery\B.DESIGN\B200CAD\003-BASICDESIGNSUBMISSION\A-CADFILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Blue lines: Lines of Astrological Houses gen-
study and instruction. Within the framework of astrology, the sky                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               erated by the ideal celestial.
is conceptually divided into twelve distinct celestial houses, each                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Blue surface: 12 planes within a day (rotation
representing a two-hour interval of solar time. Consequently, de-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               angle of 30°).
termining the Celestial Houses resembles the establishment of the
astronomical hour system, such as the French hour system. The
planes of light utilized to define the Celestial Houses are derived
from the combined influence of the Sun and the axis of the North
Star (Figure 2.69). They correspond to the celestial Houses. The lines
of this system arise from a bundle of planes with an angle of 30 de-
grees and the axis of rotation towards the North Star, i.e., north (Fig-
ure 2.70). They are tilted relative to the horizon 45.1885 degrees,
equal to Grenoble's latitude  = 45.1885 degrees. By employing
this method, the projection of the Celestial Houses onto the celes-
tial sphere enables a comprehensive understanding of their spatial
arrangement within the interior space (Figure 2.71).

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  71.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                     The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Generate the Celestial
                                              Houses Inside the Inner Space of a Reflected Sundial.

The Twelve Astrological Houses, also known as the Celestial Houses, represent a fundamental concept within astrology. The projection
of the Celestial Houses onto the interior space can be achieved by delineating their presence on a celestial sphere. The generation of
these houses involves using a series of planes, each characterized by a rotation angle of 30° and a rotation axis aligned towards the north
pole.

72.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox
L - Limits of the sundial
T.L  - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
PE - Plane of the Ecliptic
A.E - Axis of the Ecliptic
 - Aries Point
S - Limit of polar stars always visible
in the northern hemisphere
Blue lines: Twelve astrological hous-
es generated by the ideal celestial.
Blue dash lines: Twelve astrological
houses found on the staircase.

Figure 2.71 The analysis of Twelve Astrolog-  73.
ical Houses inside the Reflective Sundial in
Grenoble.
Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                    6.

   Conclusion: Comparison of the Ideal
  Sphere Model to the 3D Survey Model

The accuracy of complex information systems within the reflecting sun-
dial at Stendhal High School in Grenoble was investigated and evaluated
through a comparative analysis of the photogrammetry-based 3D recon-
struction and the intersection lines obtained from projecting the celestial
sphere into the interior space. This examination allows for an in-depth
assessment of the study's precision. The 3D model represents the current
state of the reflecting sundial (Figure 2.72). At the same time, the projec-
tion of the celestial sphere into the interior space signifies the envisioned
ideal outcome envisioned by Father Bonfa (Figure 2.73).

By overlaying these two components, precise and congruent results are
obtained. The figure below illustrates a detailed comparison between
the sundial's current condition and the ideal lines made by the 3d stim-
ulation (Figure 2.74). A remarkable relative precision exists between the
lines drawn by Father Bonfa in the 17th century and the lines derived
from the 3D model. Nevertheless, it is essential to acknowledge the lim-
itations imposed by the existing condition of the sundial in Grenoble.
Due to the upward geometry of the stairway, certain areas of the ceiling
became inaccessible for the beams of light at specific times of the year,
preventing Father Bonfa from accurately depicting them.

The precision achieved can be attributed to Father Bonfa's use of a tri-         Figure 2.72 The 3D reconstruction of the
al-and-error approach during the design process. The edited lines on this        reflective sundial in Grenoble.
wall could still be visible to the naked eye after a hundred years in less
than 100 square meters.

This demonstrates that the author of this dial invested his time in cal-
culating methods. This work is equivalent to an efficient scientific study,
and the author has always prioritized correctness. This article proves Je-
suit Father Jean Bonfa's skill in mathematics and dedication.

However, it is essential to note that this thesis only provides an imper-        Figure 2.73 The Reconstruction of The lo-
fect summary considering the depth of knowledge surrounding this                 cal Celestial Sphere.
historical site. Numerous untold stories exist regarding the formation of
the spreadsheets, which were implicitly recognized for their correctness
throughout the research. Throughout the study, the thesis implicitly rec-
ognized their correctness. Furthermore, the historical stories behind Bon-
fa's father's creation of this masterwork are an area that requires further
investigation. It is believed that it will serve as a source of inspiration for
future research and provide a greater understanding of the guiding con-
cepts of its clever and erudite creator.

74.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Legend :                                          75.
Orange lines: System of declinations of the sun
generated by the ideal celestial.
Orange dash lines: System of declinations of the
sun found on the staircase.
Black lines: French hours generated by the ideal
celestial.
Black dash lines: French hours found on the
staircase.
Yellow lines: Babylonian hours were generated
by the ideal celestial.
Yellow dash lines: Babylonian hours found on
the staircase
Red lines: Italian hours were generated by the
ideal celestial.
Red dash lines: Italian hours found on the
staircase.
Blue lines: Twelve astrological houses generated
by the ideal celestial.
Blue dash lines: Twelve astrological houses
found on the staircase.

Figure 2.74 Comparison of the Ideal
Sphere Model to the 3D Survey Model

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                              Digital Version of Reflective Sundial in Grenoble, France.

                              The focus in the final part of this thesis is on using the
                              potential of digital technology to improve visitors' experi-
                              ences with the historical staircase. We have created a com-
                              prehensive digital version as an engaging and exciting
                              instrument for teaching and displaying the sundial.
                              The complete 3D model is now available online, allowing
                              visitors to dive further into the staircase's historical impor-
                              tance. By leveraging this platform, we exhibit our inven-
                              tion and serve as an excellent resource for people inter-
                              ested in learning more about this outstanding reflective
                              sundial in Grenoble, France.
                              We can considerably improve the overall experience for
                              individuals who come to tour the ancient staircase by just
                              scanning the QR code provided below.

                                    Scan to Access 3D Model Online

     https://portfolio.hotrongnhan.org

        Thank You

76.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023                                                                    77.
Università Iuav di Venezia

                                 Notes:

                                 25. Carlos Sommervogel, Bibliothequde e la Compagnidee Jesus,
                                 Paris, 1890-1960, vol. 1, p. 693-94.
                                 26. Stroup, Alice. "Le Comté Venaissin (1696) of Jean Bonfa, SJ: A
                                 paradoxical map by an accidental cartographer." Imago Mundi
                                 47, no. 1, 1995, p.118-137.
                                 27. Rey Pailhade J. de; Rome A. Favot A, Le cadran solaire du lycée
                                 de jeunes filles de Grenoble, Bulletin de la Société de statistique
                                 de l'Isère, 1920.
                                 28. This place only open on the last Saturday of each month.
                                 Online reservation at https://www.grenoble-tourisme.com/en/
                                 catalog/detail/l-horloge-solaire-5364697/ .
                                 29 Trilateration is a surveying technique in which the lengths
                                 of the sides of a triangle are measured, generally using a laser
                                 measure, and angles are calculated from this information.
                                 30. Agisoft Metashape is a stand-alone software product that
                                 performs photogrammetric processing of digital images and
                                 generates 3D spatial data to be used in GIS applications, cul-
                                 tural heritage documentation, and visual effects production as
                                 well as for indirect measurements of objects of various scales.
                                 31 The study by J. de Rey Pailhade, A. Rome and A. Favot de-
                                 fines this curve, p. 273, like a "snail of Pascal". On this point, we
                                 separate ourselves from these authors: it seems to us that, both
                                 by its graphics and by the conception from which it stems, this
                                 curve is nothing other than a hyperbolic spiral. Its radius vector
                                 decreases in inverse proportion to the increase in its central an-
                                 gle, which is the very definition of the hyperbolic spiral. In other
                                 words, each time the angle (at the center) of solar time increas-
                                 es 36 by 15°, the radius of the curve is reduced by the width of
                                 a daily-colored zone. And vice versa.
                                 32. R. Migliari, Dieci lezioni di geometria descrittiva - la teoria
                                 delle ombre e del chiaroscuro - il modello geometrico del moto
                                 apparente del sole, in the series of Quaderni di Applicazioni
                                 della Geometria Descrittiva, by O. Fasolo and R. Migliari, n.3,
                                 Roma, 1984, p. 494.
                                 33. "Black has been used for the French hour system on the
                                 diagrams attached to this thesis", Rey Pailhade J. de; Rome A.
                                 Favot A, Le cadran solaire du lycée de jeunes filles de Grenoble,
                                 Bulletin de la Société de statistique de l'Isère, 1920.
                                 34. Rey Pailhade J. de; Rome A. Favot A, Le cadran solaire du
                                 lycée de jeunes filles de Grenoble, Bulletin de la Société de sta-
                                 tis-tique de l'Isère, 1920.
                                 35. L'HORLOGE SOLAIRE DU LYCÉE STEN-DHAL,1673, Publication
                                 of the Foyer du Lycée Stendhal, distribution: Librairie Arthaud
                                 (1984).
                                 36. Rey Pailhade J. de; Rome A. Favot A, Le cadran solaire du ly-
                                 cée de jeunes filles de Grenoble, Bulletin de la So-ciété de statis-
                                 tique de l'Isère, 1920.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                    Appendix A

                                      The Sun's declination in a year.

                                           Table of the Sun's Declination
                              Mean Value for the Four Years of a Leap Year Cycle

Day JAN FEB MAR                 APR      MAY        JUN       JUL       AUG       SEP     OCT       NOV        DEC
                              N4° 18'   N14° 54'  N21° 58'  N23° 09'  N18° 10'  N8° 30'  S2° 57'   S14° 14'  S21° 43'
1 S23° 04' S17° 20' S7° 49'   N4° 42'   N15° 12'  N22° 06'  N23° 05'  N17° 55'  N8° 09'  S3° 20'   S14° 34'  S21° 52'
                              N5° 05'   N15° 30'  N22° 14'  N23° 01'  N17° 40'  N7° 47'  S3° 44'   S14° 53'  S22° 01'
2 S22° 59' S17° 03' S7° 26'   N5° 28'   N15° 47'  N22° 22'  N22° 56'  N17° 24'  N7° 25'  S4° 07'   S15° 11'  S22° 10'
                              N5° 51'   N16° 05'  N22° 29'  N22° 51'  N17° 08'  N7° 03'  S4° 30'   S15° 30'  S22° 18'
3 S22° 54' S16° 46' S7° 03'   N6° 13'   N16° 22'  N22° 35'  N22° 45'  N16° 52'  N6° 40'  S4° 53'   S15° 48'  S22° 25'
                              N6° 36'   N16° 39'  N22° 42'  N22° 39'  N16° 36'  N6° 18'  S5° 16'   S16° 06'  S22° 32'
4 S22° 48' S16° 28' S6° 40'   N6° 59'   N16° 55'  N22° 47'  N22° 33'  N16° 19'  N5° 56'  S5° 39'   S16° 24'  S22° 39'
                              N7° 21'   N17° 12'  N22° 53'  N22° 26'  N16° 02'  N5° 33'  S6° 02'   S16° 41'  S22° 46'
5 S22° 42' S16° 10' S6° 17'   N7° 43'   N17° 27'  N22° 58'  N22° 19'  N15° 45'  N5° 10'  S6° 25'   S16° 58'  S22° 52'
                              N8° 07'   N17° 43'  N23° 02'  N22° 11'  N15° 27'  N4° 48'  S6° 48'   S17° 15'  S22° 57'
6 S22° 36' S15° 52' S5° 54'   N8° 28'   N17° 59'  N23° 07'  N22° 04'  N15° 10'  N4° 25'  S7° 10'   S17° 32'  S23° 02'
                              N8° 50'   N18° 14'  N23° 11'  N21° 55'  N14° 52'  N4° 02'  S7° 32'   S17° 48'  S23° 07'
7 S22° 28' S15° 34' S5° 30'   N9° 11'   N18° 29'  N23° 14'  N21° 46'  N14° 33'  N3° 39'  S7° 55'   S18° 04'  S23° 11'
                              N9° 33'   N18° 43'  N23° 17'  N21° 37'  N14° 15'  N3° 16'  S8° 18'   S18° 20'  S23° 14'
8 S22° 21' S15° 15' S5° 07'   N9° 54'   N18° 58'  N23° 20'  N21° 28'  N13° 56'  N2° 53'  S8° 40'   S18° 35'  S23° 17'
                              N10° 16'  N19° 11'  N23° 22'  N21° 18'  N13° 37'  N2° 30'  S9° 02'   S18° 50'  S23° 20'
9 S22° 13' S14° 56' S4° 44'   N10° 37'  N19° 25'  N23° 24'  N21° 08'  N13° 18'  N2° 06'  S9° 24'   S19° 05'  S23° 22'
                              N10° 58'  N19° 38'  N23° 25'  N20° 58'  N12° 59'  N1° 43'  S9° 45'   S19° 19'  S23° 24'
10 S22° 05' S14° 37' S4° 20'  N11° 19'  N19° 51'  N23° 26'  N20° 47'  N12° 39'  N1° 20'  S10° 07'  S19° 33'  S23° 25'
                              N11° 39'  N20° 04'  N23° 26'  N20° 36'  N12° 19'  N0° 57'  S10° 29'  S19° 47'  S23° 26'
11 S21° 56' S14° 18' S3° 57'  N12° 00'  N20° 16'  N23° 26'  N20° 24'  N11° 59'  N0° 33'  S10° 50'  S20° 00'  S23° 26'
                              N12° 20'  N20° 28'  N23° 26'  N20° 12'  N11° 39'  N0° 10'  S11° 12'  S20° 13'  S23° 26'
12 S21° 47' S13° 58' S3° 33'  N12° 40'  N20° 39'  N23° 25'  N20° 00'  N11° 19'  S0° 14'  S11° 33'  S20° 26'  S23° 26'
                              N13° 00'  N20° 50'  N23° 24'  N19° 47'  N10° 58'  S0° 37'  S11° 54'  S20° 38'  S23° 25'
13 S21° 37' S13° 38' S3° 10'  N13° 19'  N21° 01'  N23° 23'  N19° 34'  N10° 38'  S1° 00'  S12° 14'  S20° 50'  S23° 23'
                              N13° 38'  N21° 12'  N23° 21'  N19° 21'  N10° 17'  S1° 24'  S12° 35'  S21° 01'  S23° 21'
14 S21° 27' S13° 18' S2° 46'  N13° 58'  N21° 22'  N23° 19'  N19° 08'  N9° 56'   S1° 47'  S12° 55'  S21° 12'  S23° 19'
                              N14° 16'  N21° 31'  N23° 16'  N18° 54'  N9° 35'   S2° 10'  S13° 15'  S21° 23'  S23° 16'
15 S21° 16' S12° 58' S2° 22'  N14° 35'  N21° 41'  N23° 13'  N18° 40'  N9° 13'   S2° 34'  S13° 35'  S21° 33'  S23° 12'
                                        N21° 50'            N18° 25'  N8° 52'            S13° 55'            S23° 08'
16 S21° 06' S12° 37' S1° 59'

17 S20° 54' S12° 16' S1° 35'

18 S20° 42' S11° 55' S1° 11'

19 S20° 30' S11° 34' S0° 48'

20 S20° 18' S11° 13' S0° 24'

21 S20° 05' S10° 52' 0° 00'

22 S19° 52' S10° 30' N0° 24'

23 S19° 38' S10° 08' N0° 47'

24 S19° 24' S9° 46' N1° 11'

25 S19° 10' S9° 24' N1° 35'

26 S18° 55' S9° 02' N1° 58'

27 S18° 40' S8° 39' N2° 22'

28 S18° 25' S8° 17' N2° 45'

29 S18° 09' S8° 03' N3° 09'

30 S17° 53'  N3° 32'

31 S17° 37'  N3° 55'

78.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023  Reference:
Università Iuav di Venezia

       Bibliography

Books
    1. Allen, Stan, Practice: Architecture, Technique + Representation, London: Routledge,
         2009.
    2. Andersen, Kirsti, The Geometry of An Art. The History of The Mathematical Theory of
         Perspective from Alberti to Monge, New York: Springer, 2007.
    3. Cousins, Frank, Sundials, London: John Barker, 1969.
    4. De Rosa, Agostino, La Geometria Nell'immagine: Storia Dei Metodi Di Rappresentazi-
         one, Torino: UTET, 2002.
    5. De Rosa, Agostino, Cecità Del Vedere. Sull'origine Delle Immagini, Roma: Aracne, 2021.
    6. Evans, James, The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy, London: Oxford Univer-
         sity Press, 1998.
    7. Enrico, Garnier, Gnomonica: Teoria E Pratica Dell'orologio Solare, Milano: Hoepli, 1938.
    8. Gatty, Margaret, The Book of Sundials, Fourth edition, London: Georg Bell and Sons,
         1900.
    9. Kircher, Athanasius, Ars Magna Lucis Et Umbrae In Decem Libros Digesta, Roma: Typis
         Ludovici Grignani, 1646.
    10. Lennox-Boyd, Mark, Sundials: History, Art, People, Science, London: Frances Lincoln,
         2006.
    11. Maignan, Emmanuel, Perspectiva Horaria Sive De Horographia Gnomonica Tum Theo-
         retica Tum Practica Libri Quatuor, Rome: Typis & Expenses Philippi Rubie, 1648.
    12. Rossum, Dohrn-van, Gerhard, History of The Hour: Clocks and Modern Temporal Or-
         ders, USA: University Chicago Press, 1996.
    13. Waugh, Albert, Sundials: Their Theory and Construction, New York: Dover Publica-
         tions, 1996.
    14. Whitmore, P.J.S., The Order of Minims in Seventeenth-Century France, New York:
         Springer, 1967.

Articles
    1. Adam, Webster, and Blair, Macintyre, "Augmented Reality in Architectural Construc-
         tion, Inspection and Renovation", Third Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering,
         Anaheim, 1996, pp. 913-919.
    2. By Admin Stendhal, "An Establishment Steeped in History", https://Stendhal.Ent.Au-
         vergnerhonealpes.Fr/Presentation-Et-Vie-De-La-Cite/Historique-Et-Visites/L-Hor-
         loge-Solaire-Et-Batiments/ (Last access 15 May 2022).
    3. Kraus, Karl, "Photogrammetry", Photogrammetry Design, Bonn, 1994.
    4. Margarida, Archinard, "Les Cadrans Solaires Analemmatiques", vol. 62, no. 3, Annals of
         Science, 2005, pp. 309-346.
    5. Monsignor, Fourier, Bonnard, "History of The Royal Convent of La Trinité Du Mont Pin-
         cio in Rome", Rome: Etablissements Francais: Desclee, 1933, pp. 48-49.
    6. Toran, Caudell, and David, Mizell, "Augmented Reality: An Application of Heads-Up
         Display Technology to Manual Manufacturing Processes", Hawaii International Confer-
         ence on Systems Science, 1992, pp. 659-660.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                          79.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

List of Figures:                                                    Figure 1.17 Mondovie's falling vertical sundial (Italy). The dial
                                                                    table is oriented vertically. The pattern of hour lines and the po-
Figure 1.1 Ancient Egyptian Obelisks (slender, tapering, four-sid-  sition of the style depend on the orientation of the dial. (Photo
ed monuments) were built as early as 3500 BCE. Their moving         courtesy of S.Gregori)
shadows formed a kind of sundial, enabling people to partition      Figure 1.18 A ring watches. The suspension points of the dy-
the day into morning and afternoon. (Photo courtesy of ohhen-       namic clock with the local latitude, 2011, is visible on the right
ry415 - Obelisk)                                                    of the wider ring. (Photo courtesy of Whipple Museum)
Figure 1.2 Stonehenge was constructed from around 3000 BC           Figure 1.19 Bowl of Ahaz refracting scaphe sundial, by Georg
to 2000 BC in Wiltshire, England, many believe that they actu-      Hartman, Nuremberg, c. 1525-1564 - Putnam Gallery (Photo
ally served as a giant sundial. (Photo courtesy of Credit: David    courtesy of Harvard University)
Goddard/Getty Images)                                               Figure 1.20 Cylindrical sundial, 1548. (Photo courtesy of Kuns-
Figure 1.3 The most primitive form of Gnomonic, Hand-sketch         thistorisches Museum Vienna )
by Ho Trong Nhan                                                    Figure 1.21 Analemmatic sundial Herkenrode Design Willy
Figure 1.4 World's oldest known sundial, from Egypt's Valley        Leenders.
of the Kings (c. 1500 BC), used to measure work hours. (Photo       Figure 1.22 A horizontal sundial at Vaire in the Vendee. The style
courtesy of University of Basel)                                    is in the form of a triangle. (Photo courtesy of SAF/R.Sagot)
Figure 1.5 Hemispherical Greek sundial from Ai Khanoum, Af-         Figure 1.23 Rocco Bovi's camera obscura sundial (1771-1772) in
ghanistan, 3rd-2nd century BCE.                                     the Carthusian monastery of San Martino, Naples. (Photo cour-
Figure 1.6 Athens' Tower of the Winds (1st century BC). A sundi-    tesy of Alessandra Pagliano)
al may be seen on each side of this octagonal tower. The hour       Figure 1.24 Grenoble. Jesuit College (current Stendhal Interna-
lines can still be seen. However, they are not apparent in this     tional High School). 2 ceilings and 4 walls in the central stair-
shot. (Photo courtesy of CORBIS/S.Vannini)                          case. Jean Bonfa, Jesuit. 1638-1724. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong
Figure 1.7 A dial with a scaphe and an eyelet (Louvre Museum,       Nhan)
1st-2nd century AD). With this hemispherical display, the light     Figure 1.25 The fantastic reflected dial in the engraving of Kirch-
point represents the time and seasons. (Photo courtesy of RM-       er's book. All the elements of the room are disposed in symme-
N/H.Lewandowski)                                                    try with regard to the meridian plane.
Figure 1.8 A Graeco-Roman dial (Timgad, Algeria). The style was     Figure 1.26 The theory of the reflected ceiling dial according to
originally located at the junction of the hour lines. The temporal  Maignan.
hours and season dates were represented by the tip of the shad-     Figure 1.27 The disposition of the walls and ceilings bearing Fa-
ow. (Photo courtesy of N. Marquet)                                  ther Bonfa's reflected dial in Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of Ho
Figure 1.9 An Arab Islamic sundial in the Museum of Islamic Art     Trong Nhan)
in Cairo, Egypt. This magnificent vertical sundial was designed     Figure 1.28 Saint-Antoine-en-Vienne. The southwest reflected
to determine the hours of Islamic prayers. (Photo courtesy of A.    dial drawn on the spiral staircase. (Photo courtesy of Paul Gag-
du Boistesselin)                                                    naire)
Figure 1.10 Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae is a 1646 work by the         Figure 1.29 Trinita dei Monti, Rome. The Gallery of the Astrolabe.
Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher.                                  The reflecting mirror is on the sill below the twin shutters. (Pho-
Figure 1.11 A vertical sundial in the courtyard of the Hôtel des    to courtesy of Paul Gagnaire)
Invalides in Paris. The black, unbroken hour lines indicate true    Figure 1.30 The Reflection Sundial at Palazzo Spada in Rome
solar time, and the red dotted lines indicate the Babylonian        Figure 1.31 Sebastian Munster, Compositio Horologiorum in
hour (i.e., the time elapsed since sunrise). (Photo courtesy of     Plano, Muro, Truncis, Anulo, Concavo, Cylindro, & Varijs Qua-
SAF/R.Sagot)                                                        drantibus. Cum signorum zodiaci et diversarum horarum in-
Figure 1.12 The projection of Celestial Sphere onto a plane.        scriptionibus, Basilea, 1531.
(Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)                                   Figure 1.32 Oronce Finé, Protomathesis, Paris, 1532.
Figure 1.13 The principle of the sundial. The meridians 15 de-      Figure 1.33 Athanasius Kircher (2 May 1602 - 27 November
grees apart in the equatorial plane can be projected onto vari-     1680)[1] was a German Jesuit scholar and polymath who pub-
ably inclined planes, in the form of straight lines known as hour   lished around 40 major works of comparative religion, geology,
lines, Savoie Denis. Sundials: Design Construction and Use.         and medicine.
Springer; Published in Association with Praxis 2009, p.39.          Figure 1.34 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de
Figure 1.14 Diagram of the celestial sphere. "Mathematical Tech-    horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome,
niques: The Celestial Sphere." Starry Messenger: The Celestial      1648.
Sphere, www.sites.hps.cam.ac.uk/starry/armillmaths.html. Ac-        Figure 1.35 Ignace-Gaston Pardiès, Deux machines propres à
cessed 17 May 2023.                                                 faire les quadrans, 1687
Figure 1.15 The principle of the sundial. The meridians are pro-    Figure 1.36 Here is an Image from page.582 in Arts Magna Lucis
jected onto the horizontal sundial from the hour lines, and the     and Umbras.
parallels from the diurnal arcs. Sundials: Design Construction      Figure 1.37 Catoptric sundial, Palazzo Spada in Rome.
and Use. Springer; Published in Association with Praxis 2009,       Figure 1.38 Illustrations of Two machines suitable for making
p.38.                                                               quadrans, R.P. Ignace Gaston Pardies.
Figure 1.16 A horizontal sundial of Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of    Figure 1.39 Illustrations of this application, R.P. Ignace Gaston
Ho Trong Nhan)                                                      Pardies.

80.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Figure 1.40 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva Horaria Sive De           Figure 1.60 3D Simulation of The Reflecting Sundial at Palazzo
Horographia Gnomonica Tum Theoretica Tum Practica, Rome,            Spada, Rome (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
1648, p. 362.                                                       Figure 1.61 The Church of San Cristo in Brescia (Photo courtesy
Figure 1.41 Dedicated to Bernardino Spada, Emmanuel Maig-           of Ho Trong Nhan)
nan, Perspectiva Horaria Sive De Horographia Gnomonica Tum          Figure 1.62 The cross vaults of the Franciscan cloister of Marti-
Theoretica Tum Practica, Rome, 1648.                                nengo, Bergamo 2011.
Figure 1.42 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva Horaria Sive De           Figure 1.63 The vertical plane clock with French hours kept in
Horographia Gnomonica Tum Theoretica Tum Practica, Rome,            the cloister of Santa Maria della Pace in Alzano Lombardo near
1648, p. 466.                                                       Bergamo, 2011.
Figure 1.43 The Celestial Sphere, Savoie Denis. Sundials: De-       Figure 1.64 The quadrant under the cross vault in the cloister of
sign Construction and Use. Praxis 2009, http://site.ebrary.com/     Romacolo, Bergamo, 2011.
id/10308909 Accessed 15 May 2023.                                   Figure 1.65 The section of The Reflecting Sundial at The Church
Figure 1.44 The local Celestial Sphere. The Celestial Sphere is     of San Cristo in Brescia (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
referred to when discussing apparent annual motions, while          Figure 1.66 3D Simulation of at The Church of San Cristo in Bres-
the local Celestial Sphere is used for apparent diurnal and noc-    cia (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
turnal paths, Savoie Denis. Sundials: Design Construction and       Figure 2.1 The Lycée Stendhal in Grenoble (Photo courtesy of
Use. Praxis 2009, http://site.ebrary.com/id/10308909 Accessed       Ho Trong Nhan)
15 May 2023.                                                        Figure 2.2 Stendhal, Marie-Henri Beyle (Photo courtesy of Gam-
Figure 1.45 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de           ma-Rapho, Getty Images)
horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome,            Figure 2.3 Le Comtj Venaissin par le R. P. Bonfa de la Compagnie
1648, p. 46,58.                                                     de Jesus professeur des Mathimatiques a Avignon, engraved
Figure 1.46 3D Reconstruction of the projection of A Celestial      and printed by L. David in 1696, altered and reprinted in 1762.
Sphere Based on from Emmanuel Maignan's book.                       (Photo courtesy of Bibliotheque Ceccano, Avignon; Photo Das-
Figure 1.47 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de           pet.)
horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome,            Figure 2.4 The Axonometry of Lycée Stendhal, Grenoble.
1648, p. 334.                                                       Figure 2.5 The section of Lycée Stendhal, Grenoble, with the
Figure 1.48 Scheme indicating the reflection of solar rays on a     sunlight spot on February 26, 2022.
circular mirror, Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de      Figure 2.6 Mirror positioned on the windowsill of the staircase
horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome,            (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
1648, p. 283.                                                       Figure 2.7 The time systems inside the Reflective Sundial in
Figure 1.49 Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de           Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome,            Figure 2.8 Inscriptions decorated inside the Reflective Sundial in
1648, p. 324, 328, 330, 332.                                        Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
Figure 1.50 Finding the local latitude by measuring the sidere-     Figure 2.9 Photos of guests visiting Grenoble's reflected sundial
al elevation, Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de         on March 26th, 2022. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome,            Figure 2.10 Dimensions developed from the survey at Greno-
1648, p. 163.                                                       ble's reflecting sundial.
Figure 1.51 Verticale mobile, Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva         Figure 2.11 Dimensions obtained by the trilateration method.
horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum            Figure 2.12 The 3D model has been generated by comparing
practica, Rome, 1648, p. 373.                                       the two measuring methods.
Figure 1.52 Tracing of catoptric lines through a flat sundial, Em-  Figure 2.13 The diagram illustrates the picture collection proce-
manuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gno-        dure for photogrammetry.
monica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome, 1648, p. 432.             Figure 2.14 The photographs were shot during a study of reflect-
Figure 1.53 Meridiano mobile, Emmanuel Maignan, Perspecti-          ing sundials in Grenoble. (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
va horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum         Figure 2.15 Grenoble's reflecting sundial 3D model scan with
practica, Rome, 1648, p. 378.                                       texturing.
Figure 1.54 Construction of declinations and hour lines, Em-        Figure 2.16 Plan and section of reflective sundial at Stendhal
manuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gno-        School, Grenoble.
monica tum theoretica tum practica, Rome, 1648, p. 387.             Figure 2.17 The HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock) on
Figure 1.55 3D Reconstruction of the Meridiano mobile.              the west side wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.
Figure 1.56 3D Reconstruction of the Verticale mobile.              Figure 2.18 Reconstruction of HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Uni-
Figure 1.57 Facade of the Palazzo Spada (Photo courtesy of          versal clock)
Daderot)                                                            Figure 2.19 The table of CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Calendar
Figure 1.58 Portrait of Minim friar and mathematician Jean          of Mary) on the west side wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial
François Niceron, illustration to Niceron's "Thaumaturgus Opti-     Figure 2.20 The table of CALENDARVM SOC. IESV. Calendar of
cus" (Paris: François Langlois dit Ciartres, 1646), Print made by:  the Society of Jesus on the central east wall of Grenoble's Re-
Michel Lasne                                                        flective Sundial.
Figure 1.59 The section of The Reflecting Sundial at Palazzo Spa-   Figure 2.21 The table of HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER
da, Rome (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)                          SOLEM on the central east wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan                                            81.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

Figure 2.22 Reconstruction of HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE             tive Sundial in Grenoble.
PER SOLEM                                                            Figure 2.51 Orthogonal Projections of Babylonians Hours Dials
Figure 2.23 The table of NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New            Figure 2.52 The Existing Babylonian hour system inside the re-
Moon Civil Calendar on the central west wall of Grenoble's Re-       flective sundial in Grenoble.
flective Sundial.                                                    Figure 2.53 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal Projection of
Figure 2.24 The reconstruction of NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL               The Azimuthal Sphere.
LVNAE - New Moon Civil Calendar                                      Figure 2.54 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal Projection of
Figure 2.25 The table of Epactes on the east wall of Grenoble's      The Celestial Sphere
Reflective Sundial.                                                  Figure 2.55 The Babylonians Time Lines Results from the Inter-
Figure 2.26 The inscription decorated inside the Reflective Sun-     section of the Planes Surface with The Staircase at 6:00.
dial in Grenoble.                                                    Figure 2.56 The intersection between Babylonians' Time planes
Figure 2.27 The inscription decorated inside the Reflective Sun-     with the staircase and the starting 0:00 at sunrise on the horizon.
dial in Grenoble.                                                    Yellow lines: Babylonian hours were generated by the ideal ce-
Figure 2.28 The table of CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calen-           lestial.
dar) on the east wall of Grenoble's Reflective Sundial.              Yellow surface: 24 planes starting at 0:00 when sunrise on the
Figure 2.29 The reconstruction of CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's         horizon.
Calendar)                                                            Figure 2.57 The analysis of Babylonian Hours Dials inside the Re-
Figure 2.30 Translation of Latin Inscriptions inside the Reflective  flective Sundial in Grenoble.
Sundial in Grenoble on the central east wall of Grenoble's Re-       Figure 2.58 Orthogonal Projections of Italian Hours Dials
flective Sundial.                                                    Figure 2.59 The Existing Italian hour system inside the reflective
Figure 2.31 ,2.32, 2.33 The inscription decorated inside the Re-     sundial in Grenoble.
flective Sundial in Grenoble.                                        Figure 2.60 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal Projection of
Figure 2.34 The color palette represents the time system.            The Azimuthal Sphere.
Figure 2.35 The table of Zodiac throughout a year.                   Figure 2.61 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal Projection of
Figure 2.36 Astronomic scheme of the Solar and the determina-        The Celestial Sphere
tion of diurnal lines on a conical dial by light cone method.        Figure 2.62 The Italian Time Lines Results from the Intersection
Figure 2.37 The inscription decorated Zodiac signs inside the re-    of the Planes Surface with The Staircase at 18:00 (6:00 Babylo-
flective sundial in Grenoble.                                        nian Time).
Figure 2.38 The projection of solar cone of the system of decli-     Figure 2.63 The intersection between Italian Time planes with
nations on the interior space during the period spanning from        the staircase and the starting 0:00 at sunset on the horizon.
March 20 to 22.                                                      Red lines: Italian hours were generated by the ideal celestial.
Figure 2.39 Orthogonal projections of the system of declinations     Red surface: 24 planes starting at 0:00 when sunset is on the
of the Sun based on the Appendix A - the Sun's declination in a      horizon.
year.                                                                Figure 2.64 The analysis of Italian Hours Dials inside the Reflec-
Figure 2.40 The intersection between the system of declinations      tive Sundial in Grenoble.
of the sun with the staircase.                                       Figure 2.65 The Existing Astrological Houses system inside the
Orange lines: System of declinations of the sun generated by the     reflective sundial in Grenoble.
ideal celestial.                                                     Figure 2.66 Orthogonal Projections of Twelve Astrological Hous-
Orange Surface: The conic surface of light within a year.            es
Figure 2.41 The analysis of system of declinations of the sun - the  Figure 2.67 The table of The Houses of The Celestial Houses in-
signs of the zodiac inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.       side the reflective sundial in Grenoble by J. de Rey Pailhade.
Figure 2.42 The inscription decorated Roman numerals inside          Figure 2.68 Astronomic Representation of The Celestial Houses
the reflective sundial in Grenoble.                                  on The Celestial Sphere.
Figure 2.43 The projection of the French hour system of the ce-      Figure 2.69 The Celestial Houses Lines Results from the Intersec-
lestial sphere on the interior space during the period 12:00 in a    tion of the Planes Surface with The Staircase during 12:00 in a
day.                                                                 day.
Figure 2.44 Orthogonal Projections of French Hours Dials.            Figure 2.70 The intersection between The Celestial Houses'
Figure 2.45 The Sun's hour angle H. It is measured along the Ce-     planes and the staircase.
lestial Equator from its culmination in the south.                   Blue lines: Lines of Astrological Houses generated by the ideal
Figure 2.46 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal Projection of         celestial.
The Azimuthal Sphere.                                                Blue surface: 12 planes within a day (rotation angle of 30°).
Figure 2.47 The Sundial Quadrant in Orthogonal Projection of         Figure 2.71 The analysis of Twelve Astrological Houses inside the
The Celestial Sphere.                                                Reflective Sundial in Grenoble.
Figure 2.48 The French time lines result from the intersection of    Figure 2.72 The 3D reconstruction of the reflective sundial in
light planes with the staircase.                                     Grenoble.
Black lines: French hours generated by the ideal celestial.          Figure 2.73 The Reconstruction of The local Celestial Sphere.
Gray surface: The Plane of light within a day.                       Figure 2.74 Comparison of the Ideal Sphere Model to the 3D Sur-
Figure 2.49 The Existing French hour system inside the reflective    vey Model
sundial in Grenoble.
Figure 2.50 The analysis of French Hours Dials inside the Reflec-

82.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              83.
The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Grenoble (FR)

                                 for more information, please contact:
                                    https://portfolio.hotrongnhan.org/

84.
Master Architecture Thesis 2022/2023
Università Iuav di Venezia

Graphic by Ho Trong Nhan              85.
The sun clock at Grenoble is a testament to the technological advances of the 17th cen-
tury. This clock is built in fresco and covers 100m2 of wall and ceiling space. It does not
require any electricity or internet connectivity. Its creator - Jesuit Father Jean Bonfa and
his student had compressed many data into this fresco, including history, mathematics,
astronomy, and geography. The construction of sundials, particularly reflected ones, was
evidently a passion for scholars during this time. Therefore, it is difficult for ordinary visi-
tors to comprehend all of the information of this piece of art. The purpose of this paper is
to present all the information about the building in a visual way so readers can get a better
understanding of it.

                                         for more information, please contact:
                                            https://portfolio.hotrongnhan.org/
Università Iuav di Venezia                                                                                                     Learning from Emanuele Maignan:                                                                                                                         The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                from Ideal Sphere to Reflected Sundial                                                                                                                                                                               Grenoble (FR)
engineering-architecture 2022-2023
                                                                                                                                    The second lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book:                                                                   The third lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book:
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                                                                                                        The projection of A Celestial Sphere                                                                     The Reflected Celestial Sphere - Catoptric Sphere
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042

  The first lesson from Emmanuel Maignan's book:
             The concept of the Celestial Sphere

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Emmanuel Maignan, Perspectiva horaria sive de horographia gnomonica tum theoretica tum practica,

A Center Repre-    Since the radius of the Earth is negligible compared with the distance to the heavenly bodies,                                                                                                                                     Verticale mobile,         Tracing of catoptric lines  Meridiano mobile,         Construction of decli-
senting the Earth  including the Sun, we can consider the Earth to lie precisely at the center of this Sphere.                                                                                                                                        Emmanuel Maignan,         through a flat sundial,     Emmanuel Maignan,         nations and hour lines,
Pole Star Axis.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Perspectiva horaria sive  Emmanuel Maignan,           Perspectiva horaria sive  Emmanuel Maignan,
                   The Sphere will revolve around an imaginary axis that heads close to the Pole Star (the imaginary                                                                                                                                  de horographia gno-       Perspectiva horaria sive    de horographia gno-       Perspectiva horaria sive
Celestial Equator  axis passing through the North and South Celestial Pole).                                                                                                                                                                          monica tum theoretica     de horographia gno-         monica tum theoretica     de horographia gno-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tum practica, Rome,       monica tum theoretica       tum practica, Rome,       monica tum theoretica
Horizon.           By analogy with the Earth, we also define a Celestial Equator. The Equator is the longest circular                                                                                                                                 1648, p. 373.             tum practica, Rome,         1648, p. 378.             tum practica, Rome,
The Zenith         line perpendicular to the axis of rotation, separating the Earth into northern and southern hemi-                                                                                                                                                            1648, p. 432.                                         1648, p. 387.
Local Meridian     spheres. The celestial Equator is 0° DEC, and the poles are +90° and -90°. Right ascension (RA) is
The Ecliptic       the celestial equivalent of Longitude.                                                                            3D Reconstruction of the projection of A Celestial Sphere Based on from Emmanuel Maignan's book.                 3D Reconstruction of      3D Reconstruction of
Equinoxes And                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the Verticale mobile.     the Meridiano mobile.
Solstices          The cardinal points (north, east, south, and west) are defined from Horizon.                              This is an introductory and advanced book for individuals interested in sundial research and who wish to use it
                                                                                                                             immediately to make their own reflecting sundial. In his book, Maignan mentioned a lot about using catoptric
The Zodiac         The observer's vertical axis passes through a unique point, the zenith, 90 degrees from the Hori-         spheres to create sundial projections on interior architectural surfaces. From part XI page. 34 until section XXI
                   zon.                                                                                                      ends on the page. 58, Maignan illustrated the theory of the Sphere and its circles and projection onto the plane
Latitude & Longi-                                                                                                            . This is a very innovative method never seen before; it shows the projection of spheres onto curved arches in
tude               The meridian is the great circle that passes through the North, South Point, and zenith and lies on       home interiors. On the left, we see an image of the projection of the spheres and circles in the vertical plane, with
Astronomical       the celestial Sphere.                                                                                     the observer placing his eyes on the projection of the Sun's rays. On the right, the circles of the celestial Sphere in
Hour (Optional)                                                                                                              the plane form the horizontal sundial. This drawing bears a great deal of resemblance to that published by Luigi
Babylonian Hours   The Ecliptic is the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun, representing the solar movement in         Ronca in Gnomonica sulla sfera ed analemma di Vitruvio three centuries ago.
(Optional)         a year.
Italian Hours
(Optional)         The zero point for celestial Longitude (for right ascension) is the Vernal Equinox, the intersection
System Of the      of the Ecliptic and the celestial Equator near the Sun in the Northern Hemisphere Spring. The
Astrological       point on the Ecliptic where the Sun is most north of the celestial Equator is termed the Summer
Houses of The      Solstice, and the point where it is most south of the celestial Equator is termed the Winter Sol-
Sky (Optional)     stice. The other meeting of the Celestial Equator and the Ecliptic is the Autumnal Equinox.

                   The zodiacal constellations are found in a ring along the celestial Equator, formed from the
                   chance superposition of the stars which lie along these lines of sight. As the Earth rotates once
                   around the Sun in a year, the Sun appears to pass through (or lie in front of ) each of these
                   constellations in turn. Its path is called the Ecliptic. Here is the list of Zodiac: Gemini (the Twins),
                   Cancer (the Crab), Leo (the Lion), Virgo (the Maiden), Libra (the Scale), Scorpio (the Scorpion),
                   Sagittarius (the Archer), Capricorn (the Goat), Aquarius (the Water-Carrier), Pisces (the Fish), Aries
                   (the Ram), and Taurus (the Bull).

                   Latitude and Longitude are the units that represent the coordinates in the geographic coordi-
                   nate system. The geographic coordinate system is a spherical or ellipsoidal coordinate system for
                   measuring and communicating positions directly on the Earth as latitude and Longitude.

                   The astronomical hour system is also known as the French hour system (civil time or equal time).
                   It tells the solar time as we are using today on modern watches. It provides twenty-four fixed
                   equal periods of the day and is divided into two cycles every twelve hours.

                   Babylonian hours are equinoctial hours counted from sunrise. The interval between two sunrises
                   is divided into 24 equal hours.

                   Italian hours are equinoctial hours counted from the last sunset. The interval between two sun-
                   sets is divided into 24 equal hours.

                   The twelve houses are purely mathematical creations. The unit circle, which is 360 degrees in
                   diameter, can represent the expanse of the heavens.

Comprehension of Maignan's proposal's workings requires a little consideration of astronomy: The                                                                                                                                                      Maignan's work is more than simply a technical book on catoptrics. It also explained the procedures
Celestial Sphere. The celestial Sphere is an imaginary sphere that surrounds the Earth and contains                                                                                                                                                   for creating the reflective sundials at the Palazzo Spada and the Trinità dei Monti Monastery. The book
all celestial objects. Our planet seems static to an observer on the Earth's surface, while the spherical                                                                                                                                             could be considered a valuable treatise on Gnomonics which was created by the personal observa-
dome of the sky appears to move around it. It is an essential concept for astronomers and navigators                                                                                                                                                  tions of Father Maignan. Although the book is intended for those who study catoptrics, it also includes
because it lets them quickly indicate the locations of stars, planets, and other Celestial bodies. Obser-                                                                                                                                             the classical and fundamental theories of the discipline. The mathematical and geometrical ideas that
vation of the night sky will show that the stars seem to travel from east to west around an imaginary                                                                                                                                                 connect Apollonius' Conics with the rules of perspective were underlined by Daniele Barbaro and Fed-
axis that encounters the inner surface of the Celestial Sphere close to the Pole Star. The imaginary axis                                                                                                                                             erico Commandino. Emmanuel Maignan employed it the following century when he built two catop-
is the Earth's rotational axis, passing through the Celestial Sphere at two opposite points, the North                                                                                                                                                tric sundials in the papal capital, one in Palazzo Spada and one in the monastery of Trinità dei Monti.
and South Celestial Pole. By analogy with the Earth, we also define a Celestial Equator.                                                                                                                                                              They could be simply projecting the reflected Celestial Sphere onto a surface.

                                                                                                                                                          Case Study

                                                  Case study 1 :                                                                                                                                                           Case study 2 :

                                     The reflecting sundial at Palazzo Spada, Rome                                                                                                                         The reflecting sundial at The Church of San Cristo in

                                                 Emmanuel Maignan (1644)                                                                                                                                                               Brescia

                                     Remarkable Roman Dial made by Maignan in 1644 near Capo de Ferro, in Palazzo Spa-                                                                          In the second case study, we will analyze the reflective sundial in the Church of San
                                     da. The reflecting sundial at Palazzo Spada is the starting point for the case studies of                                                                  Cristo in Brescia, renovated and reopened in 2002. The Church is located along Via
                                     this thesis. Palazzo Spada is the building in Rome that houses the Council of State and                                                                    Giovanni Piamarta. The building was built in the second half of the fifteenth century.
                                     Galleria Spada. It is located in Piazza Capo di Ferro, a small square in the Regola district,                                                              The concept of operation of The Reflecting Sundial in Brescia is the same as else-
                                     along the road that leads from Piazza Farnese to Via Arenula. It was built in 1540 for                                                                     where. It employs the use of a reflecting mirror to send sunlight deep into the archi-
                                     Cardinal Girolamo Recanati Capodiferro (1501-1559).                                                                                                        tectural environment. The mirror was placed in the center of the arch. The mirror is 25
                                     The palazzo once belonged to a Cardinal Spada, a well-known Maecenas, who had                                                                              cm from the ceiling. Reflective glass and stainless-steel panels were modified to suit
                                     asked Maignan to layout a most complete and, if possible. This reflective Dial is also                                                                     the outdoor conditions during the 2002 renovations. On the decorative ceiling, one
                                     mentioned in Niceron's book " Thaumaturgus Opticus" of 1646 (Figure 1.58). At that                                                                         can read the hours of the day, the months, the zodiac signs, and Latin inscriptions
                                     time, geometric, graphical, experimental, and instrumental methods were dominant.                                                                          honoring the sun and moon.

The Geometric Problem of The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The Geometric Problem of The
Reflecting Sundial in Palazzo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reflecting Sundial
Spada.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We reconstructed an ideal celes-
The sundial is located inside a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tial sphere associated to Brescia's
gallery with a mirror on the wall                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           latitude (45.5416° N). We are us-
facing approximately southeast.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ing the same operations of re-
Maignan made this place be-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 flection and intersection of the
comes a masterpiece of compli-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              luminous surfaces with the 3D
cation! The vaulted ceiling of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          model of the dome. By applying
gallery has a cylindrical profile,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 3D Simulation of the Celestial
and the intersection of the two                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere to Analysis, we get the in-
differently arched surfaces forms                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tersection of the geometric of the
a continuous curve on which the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sun's light one by one with the
dial lines are drawn. As usual, the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         corridor's dome. Surveys based
various line systems presented                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on these two case studies are still
different colors. Indeed, the cre-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          at the schematic level. Therefore,
ation is simply the projection                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              there are still many possibilities
of the hour lines on a cylinder                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             for further research. What we
vault. The difficulty to be solved                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          learn from these surveys is once
is projecting onto surfaces of any                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          again confirming the applicabili-
shape and orientation from a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ty of Emanuele Maignan's catop-
given point in space.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tric sphere method, although his
We reconstructed an ideal ce-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               method of research is unortho-
lestial sphere associated with                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dox and highly personal. From
Rome's latitude (41.9028° N), in-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           here I apply this method to in-
cluding many hour lines, cones                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vestigate the object of study in
of light, beams of light, and plans                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         this thesis: the reflected sundial
of light. The sphere's center was                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in Grenoble.
positioned with the mirror's cen-
ter on the window sill. By apply-    Axonometric                                                                                                                   Axonometric
ing a 3D Simulation of the Celes-
tial Sphere to Analysis, we get                                                                                              3D Simulation of The Reflecting Sun-  3D Simulation of at The Church of San
the intersection of the geometric                                                                                            dial at Palazzo Spada, Rome           Cristo in Brescia
of the sun's light one by one with                                                                                           (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)     (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
the spherical vault. The network
of quartic curves is visible from
both the outside and inside of
the room.

                                                                                                                             Legend :                              Legend :                                                                                                                                 Figure 1.61 The Church of San Cristo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in Brescia (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong
                                                                                                                             P - Pole North                        P - Pole North                                                                                                                           Nhan)
                                                                                                                             Z - Zenit                             Z - Zenit
                                                                                                                             N.G - North Geography                 N.G - North Geography
                                                                                                                             M - Mirror                            M - Mirror
                                                                                                                             M.G - Local Meridian (Rome)           M.G - Local Meridian (Rome)
                                                                                                                             H - Horizon - Equator                 H - Horizon - Equator
                                                                                                                             E - Equinox                           E - Equinox

                                                                                                                                        Equator                               Equator

Facade of the Palazzo Spada                                                                                                  Section AA'                           Section AA'                                                                                                                              Figure 1.62 The cross vaults of the Fran-
(Photo courtesy of Daderot)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ciscan cloister of Martinengo, Bergamo
                                                                                                                             The section of The Reflecting Sundi-  The section of The Reflecting Sundial                                                                                                    2011.
                                                                                                                             al at Palazzo Spada, Rome             at The Church of San Cristo in Brescia
                                                                                                                             (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)     (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
       Università Iuav di Venezia                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
       Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Grenoble (FR)
       engineering-architecture 2022-2023

       Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa
       Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
       Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The Reflective Sundial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in Grenoble

100km

       France

       Grenoble                                                                                       RUE
                  Grenoble, France                                                                          DE
                                                                                                                 LA
                                                                                                                     RÉP
                                                                                                                           UB
                                                                                                                               LIQ
                                                                                                                                    UE

                                    RUE ALPHAND

               The Lycée Stendhal
               Grenoble, France

                                                                                                                                                                             A'

                                                                                                                                        A

The Existing Condition of The Reflective Sundial in                   Legend :                                                                                                                                                                        The following are the dimensions and data of the sundial:
Grenoble:                                                             Z - Zenit                                                                                                                                                                       · The stairs are not perfectly oriented north-south. The stairs'
At the end of the 17th century, astrology was still widely prac-      N.G - North Geography
ticed. This science has been part of university mathematics           M - Mirror                                                                                                                                                                          axis is 2° 54' East.
teaching at that time. Father Bonfa's reflective sundial is a fas-    Orange lines: Sunlight spots                                                                                                                                                    · Each staircase has a width of 2,05 m.
cinating example of how ancient technology can still be used          on the interior through a mir-                                                                                                                                                  · The thickness of the wall is 0.33 m.
today. In this part, we will delve deeper into the description        ror on the window.                                                                                                                                                              · At the landing, the distance between the ceiling and the
of this remarkable piece of technology. The massive reflected
sundial is kept in one of Lycée Stendhal's staircases in the cen-     The section of Lycée Stendhal,                                                                                                                                                      floor is 3.55 meters.
ter of Grenoble. Here is some geographic information about            Grenoble, with the sunlight                                                                                                                                                     · Distance between the centers of the two mirrors: 1,63 m
Grenoble:                                                             spot on February 26, 2022.                                                                                                                                                      · The ceiling height above mirrors is 2,60 m
· Latitude of Grenoble: 45.1885° N                                                                                                                                                                                                                    · Distance from the center of the west mirror to the west
· Longitude of Grenoble: 5.7245° E                                     Section AA'
· The distance in longitude from London to Paris is 9 min 21                                                                                                                                                                                              wall: 1,42 m
                                                                       Scale 1/150                                                                                                                                                                    · Distance between the center of the west mirror and the
    sec.
The facility of the school is approximately 500 square meters.                                                                                                                                                                                            shear wall: 0,65 m
It is a large, rectangular structure with a symmetrical facade                                                                                                                                                                                        · Distance from the east mirror to the east wall: 1,42 m
featuring classical elements such as columns . Figure 2.5 is the                                                                                                                                                                                      · Distance from east mirror to shear wall: 0,65 m
section of the building that is based on the result of my survey                                                                                                                                                                                      · Distance from the mirror to the West ceiling: 3,37 m
on February 26, 2022. The sundial is composed of a collection                                                                                                                                                                                         · Distance from the mirror to the East ceiling: 3,10 m
of Baroque-style paintings painted on the walls and ceiling of                                                                                                                                                                                        · The slope of rising and falling ceilings: 3,80 m for 10m (
the stairway connecting the first and second levels. To read
time, we need to track the movement of the sun's light from                                                                                                                                                                                               i=38% )
bottom to top (corresponding to sunrise to noon) and then                                                                                                                                                                                             This work still shows the author's aesthetic taste, ingenuity,
down (corresponding to midday to sunset). The reflection                                                                                                                                                                                              and science two and a half centuries after its creation.
of the sun's rays onto a mirror positioned on the windowsill
creates this light spot. Father Jean Bonfa's work is around one
hundred square meters in size, including many different time
systems inside it: French time, i.e., the current time, counting
from midnight; Babylonian time, starting at sunrise; Italian
time, which he called Roman time; twelve months of the solar
calendar, the twelve signs of the zodiac, which are represented
by symbolic images, and the four seasons of the year: AESTAS,
AUTUMNUS, HIBERNUM, and VER.
The clock also shows the times of sunrise and sunset. By the
sundial (La Méridienne ), we can acknown the season, month,
and day by the position of the bright spot. At the same time,
the sundial includes lunar calendar information and deter-
mines the moon's age relative to the sun.

Building Location                                                                                                The Reflection Sundial of                                                                                                            Photos of guests visiting Grenoble's Mirror positioned on the windowsill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      reflected sundial on March 26th, 2022. of the staircase (Photo courtesy of Ho
On the second floor, you will be greeted by a magnificent fresco                                         The Stendhal High School in Grenoble                                                                                                         (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan) Trong Nhan)
that covers 100m 2 of walls and ceilings. They produce bright dots
that, as they cross over the lines of the walls and ceiling, display                                                                      (France)
the solar time, month, zodiac sign, and other events.
                                                                                                      The Lycée Stendhal, located in the southern French city of Grenoble, is a prominent secondary school with a long history of over two centu-
                                                                                                      ries. The Cité Scolaire Stendhal (college and high school) is a public secondary school located on Place Jean Achard in Grenoble. A fantastic
                                                                                                      position in the center of Grenoble, with easy access to public transportation, culture, and sports facilities. The school's history dates back
                                                                                                      to the 17th century. Lycée Stendhal was part of the former Collègedes Jésuites. It is the oldest school in Grenoble. The school's history is
                                                                                                      tidily connected with the Society of Jesus development in Grenoble since its first member settled here in January 1623. By authorization of
                                                                                                      Louis XIII, a branch of the Society of Jesus was established in Grenoble (passing through the capital Dauphiné). Bishop Scarron supervised
                                                                                                      the entire process. The Society of Jesus was also located in Chambéry, Lyon, Tournon, Vienne, etc. Before the entire building was finished
                                                                                                      in 1703, they constructed the surrounding buildings gradually.
      Università Iuav di Venezia                                                                               The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
      Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                       Grenoble (FR)
      engineering-architecture 2022-2023
      Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                                                                                                                                                             There is a set of fres-
      Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot                                                                                                                                                            coes painted on the
      Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042                                                                                                                                                                     walls and the ceiling of
                                                                                                                                                                                                           the staircase separating
      The West Side Wall                                                                                                                                                                                   the first from the sec-
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ond floor that form the
The West side wall includ-                                                                                                                                                                                 clock. In the landing be-
ed :                                                                                                                                                                                                       tween the two floors are
· Hours of the morning                                                                                                                                                                                     windows through which
                                                                                                                                                                                                           sunlight enters.
    (VIII, IX, X, XI)
· Calendar of Mary -                                                                                                                                                                                          Ceiling of the Staircase

    World clock                                                                                                                                                                                            Locating between the
· Signs of the Zodiac:                                                                                                                                                                                     first floor and the inter-
                                                                                                                                                                                                           mediate landing. The East
    Aquarius, Pisces, Ari-                                                                                                                                                                                 Ceiling included :
    es, Taurus , Gemini                                                                                                                                                                                    · The French, Roman,
· Celestial Houses (Xi,
    XII, I)                                                                                                                                                                                                    Babylonian and Italic
                                                                                                                                                                                                               hours
    The Central East Wall                                                                                                                                                                                  · Signs of the Zodiac.

On the left going up the                                                                                                                                                                                       The Central West Wall
stairs, from the first floor
to the intermediate land-                                                                                                                                                                                  Locating on the left going
ing. The Central east wall                                                                                                                                                                                 up the stairs, from the in-
included :                                                                                                                                                                                                 termediate landing to the
· Evening Hours                                                                                                                                                                                            second floor. The Central
· Signs of the Zodiac:                                                                                                                                                                                     West wall included :
                                                                                                                                                                                                           · Central wall west fa-
    Libra, Scorpio
· Calendar of the Soci-                                                                                                                                                                                        cade
                                                                                                                                                                                                           · Morning hours
    ety of Jesus                                                                                                                                                                                           · New lunar calendar
· New Clock
                                                                                                                                                                        Scan to Access 3D Model Online            The East Side Wall
       The Central Arch                                                                                                                                                 https://portfolio.hotrongnhan.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Locating on the right go-
South vertical wall, pillar                                                                                                                                                                                ing up the stairs, from the
and arch:                                                                                                                                                                                                  intermediate landing to
· Explanations on op-                                                                                                                                                                                      the second floor. The East
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Side Wall included :
    eration                                                                                                                                                                                                · Evening hours (I, II, III,
· Mirror
· Morning and evening                                                                                                                                                                                          IV)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           · Celestial Houses (VIII,
    hours
· Zodiac signs: Cancer,                                                                                                                                                                                        VIII, VII)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           · King's Calendar
    Leo, Virgo.                                                                                                                                                                                            · Table of Epacts
An inscription on the sun-
dial reads as follows:
 "GALLE NIGRAM ROMANE

   RVBRAM FVLVAM QVE
   BABELE HIC TIBI PINGO
 HORAM MIXTO DO SIGNA

          COLORE"
   Translated, it conveys:
  "I paint for you here the
French time in black, Roman
time in red and Babylonian
time in yellow. I provide you
with the signs of the zodiac

       in mixed colors."

                                                              Photogrammetric Survey Model

                                                        The sundial survey took place on February 26th and March 26th, 2022. The investigation required me to
                                                        measure the staircase's size, photograph its walls and ceilings, and carefully document every aspect. To en-
                                                        sure a comprehen-sive survey, specific requirements must be followed to capture the character of The Lycée
                                                        Stendhal's Reflective Sundial.

Method of Dimension Measurement                         The second method involved using trilateration         Photographing Stairs for 3D Scanning: A Step-by-         Synthesizing Images into 3D Files: A Process of
The first technique involved utilizing a ruler to mea-  to calculate the overall length of the staircase. The  Step Guide                                               Transformation
sure the staircase's specific details and overall di-   measuring procedure was divided into two sections      Photography techniques must also follow the same         The next crucial step in the 3D scanning process in-
mensions.                                               to minimize interruption to other guests during the    scenario to minimize the influence on surrounding        volves entering the captured photographs into the
1. Calculate the total number of stairs and treads      tour guide's presentation. The trilateration method    visitors. In this session, we'll divide the stairs into  Agisoft Pho-toScan Professional program (30). With-
                                                        was implemented to measure the stair, establish-       3 phases to maximize later photography and pho-          in the Agisoft PhotoScan Professional application,
    in the staircase. Each side consisted of 15 stairs  ing eight fixed stations to "spot" as many points as   togrammetry work. It is divided into two sections        photos are processed, aligned based on standard
    and one landing.                                    possible, ensuring survey accuracy. Coordinating       for the stair sides and one for the landing. We will     criteria, and spatial relationships are established.
2. As the accompanying image depicts, a typi-           points A, B, G, and H were located 2500mm higher       capture three parts in each area to cover most of        The powerful identification skills of the program
    cal step has a riser height of 160mm, a 380mm       from the finished level, while corresponding points    the wall and ceiling. The photographic survey was        find matching spots. These points serve as refer-
    tread depth, and a 2050mm tread width.              D, E, F, and C were situated at the same level as the  carried out by choosing holding points at 600mm,         ence points, making the alignment process easier
3. A measuring tape was used to collect measure-        landing.                                               1200mm, and 1800mm from the ground from                  and assur-ing the correctness of the final 3D model.
    ments from the third floor's finished level to the                                                         which images were shot to generate the spherical
    landing step and from the landing step to the                                                              panoramas.
    second floor's finished level. The dimensions
    measured for each side were around 2.5m, with
    an average ceiling height of 4300mm.
   Università Iuav di Venezia                                           The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
   Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                   Grenoble (FR)
   engineering-architecture 2022-2023
   Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa
   Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
   Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042

                                                                     A  A'

                                                                        Enlarged Plan
                                                                        Scale 1:50

A                                                                A'                    Second Floor Plan
                                                                                       Scale 1:150
                                                  Enlarged Plan
                                                  Scale 1:50                           Enlarged Section AA'
                                                                                       Scale 1:50
Università Iuav di Venezia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire Du Lycée Stendhal
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grenoble (FR)
engineering-architecture 2022-2023
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042

                                                                                                                                          CALENDARIVM REGIVM
                                                                                                                                          (King's Calendar)

Tables of Epactes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (New Moon Civil Calendar)
The East Side Wall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The Central West Wall
CALENDARVM SOC. IESV.
(Calendar of the Society of Jesus)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Universal clock)

                                                                                                                                          HOROLOG' NOVU IN                                                                                                                                                                        CALENDARIVM MARIANVM
                                                                                                                                          QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM                                                                                                                                                                                  (Calendar of Mary)

The Central East Wall                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The West Side Wall

Ceiling of the Staircase

                                                                                                                         Fresco's Meaning of Reflective Sundial at Stendhal School

HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock)                                                                                                   CALENDARVM SOC. IESV. Calendar of the Society of Jesus                                                                                         NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New Moon Civil Calendar                                          EPACTAE ANNVAE
Jesuit colleges span across various regions worldwide, and                                                                                On the Central East Wall, directly opposite the Calendar of Mary,                                                                              To make use of HOROLOGIUM NOVUM, it is essential to under-                          Post Annum MCMXVIJI (Figure 2.26)
the HOROLOGIVM VNIVERSALE (Universal clock) (Figure                                                                                       we find the CALENDARVM SOC. IESV., or the Calendar of the Soci-                                                                                stand the moon's position and phases, including when it is not
2.17) plays a crucial role in determining the time of cities                                                                              ety of Jesus (Figure 2.20). This calendar holds special significance                                                                           visible. Father Bonfa addressed this by painting a table of epacts                                                        Tables
where these educational institutions are situated. This ta-                                                                               regarding the Jesuit order, to which Father Bonfa belonged. Fa-                                                                                (1674 to 1689) and a "NOVUM KALENDER CIVIL LVNAE - New                                                         of Epactes since 1984
ble can be found on the west side wall of Grenoble's Re-                                                                                  ther Bonfa is believed to have inscribed the names of notable Je-                                                                              Moon Civil Calendar" on the high school wall. The table of epacts
flective Sundial.                                                                                                                         suits on this wall. While the passage of time has taken its toll on                                                                            and the lunar calendar serve as valuable refer-ences. The usage of                                       Year  Ep  Year  Ep                  Yea
Although the inscriptions on the board have faded with                                                                                    the inscriptions, two names have endured:                                                                                                      the table is explained in the banner placed above it:                                                                                               Ep
time and information of towns, cities, and nations have                                                                                   St. Francis Xavier, one of the founders of the Society of Jesus,                                                                                                                                                                                         84   27  99    13
been lost, we can still understand its operational principles                                                                             whose feast day is celebrated on December 3rd.                                                                                                   "Annua lunari jungatur epacta diei, Atternoque omnes terdenos                                           85                                  r
and importance. The trapezoidal board is divided into 24                                                                                  Father Régis, born on January 31, 1616, later canonized in 1737.                                                                                    rejice mense, Et collecta diem lunae te summa doceb Join"                                            86   8   2000  24                  14 29
columns and eight horizontal rows, with each trapezoidal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           87                                 15 10
time column representing a quarter of an hour (¼ hours).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "the lunar day the epact of the year, excluded thirty-one alternate                                      88   19  1                      5  16 21
With 24 time periods displayed, the table effectively rep-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     months and the sum will teach you the day of the moon"                                              89                                 17 2
resents 6 hours (¼ x 24 = 6 hours) or a quarter of a day. This                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     90   0   2     16                  18 13
division of time aligned with Father Bonfa's needs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Here's how the table is utilized, providing more detail than the list-                                    91                                 19 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ing provides: The top horizontal line shows the age of the moon,                                          92   11  3     27                  20 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         in Roman numerals. The twelve other horizontal lines correspond                                                                              21 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         each to a Gregorian month. The Arabic numerals in these rows are                                          93   22  4                      8  22 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dates of that month. By determining the date on the table, one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         may calculate the age of the moon by adding the epact of the                                              94   3   5     19                  23 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         year given by the table opposite .                                                                        95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   96   14  6                      0  24 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tables of Epactes                                                                                         97                                 25 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The epact (Figure 2.25) (Latin: epactae, from Ancient Greek: (ep-                                         98   25  7     11                  26 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aktai hmerai) = added days) was formerly defined by medieval                                                                                 27 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         astronomers as the age of a phase of the Moon in days on 22                                                    6   8     22                  28 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         March; however, under the current Gregorian calendar, the epact
                                                                                                                                          HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM                                                                                                           is defined as the age of the ecclesiastical moon on 1 January. Its                                             17  9                      3
                                                                                                                                          HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM, SOLIS PER LUNAM                                                                                          primary application is in calculating the date of Easter using com-
                                                                                                                                          LOCUS ET PER VTRUMQ DIES LUNAE AC HORAE TOTI ORBIS CO-                                                                                         putational methods. It changes from year to year (typically by 11                                              29  10    14
                                                                                                                                          GNOSCUT showcases Father Bonfa's ingenious invention for es-                                                                                   days) due to the discrep-ancy between the solar year of 365-366
                                                                                                                                          timating sun-related information based on the day of the moon.                                                                                 days and the lunar year of 354-355 days. On the east stairs, on the                                            10  11    25
                                                                                                                                          The artwork comprises 17 concentric and evenly spaced semi-cir-                                                                                second step, there is an inscription:
                                                                                                                                          cles enclosing 16 colored zones. It locates under a hori-zontal di-                                                                                                                                                                                           21  12                     6
                                                                                                                                          ameter of 10 stair depth (approximately 3.5 meters). The color or-
                                                                                                                                          der follows a pattern of red, green, red, blue, and so on. As a result,                                                                                                                                                                                       2   13    17
                                                                                                                                          red appears 8 times, green 4 times, and blue 4 times more (15
       12           1 1/4                                     1 3/4                 4         3         7 1/2     7 1/4     8 1/2         areas would be enough, with 16 semicircles). A thin vertical line
       11                                                            2                                                                    divides the artwork in half. The first circle has the numbers 1-16.
12                    12                                        12                            4         6 1/2     6 1/4     7 1/2         Then we read numerals in pairs : 2-17, 3-18, 4-19, and so on, up to                                                                                                                                                                CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar)
11                   1/4                                       3/4                  3                                                     15-30 between the last green and red areas (31). The inscrip-tion                                                                                                                                                                  The CALENDARIVM REGIVM (King's Calendar) (Figure 2.28)
                                                                                                                                          "DIES INEVNTES LVNAE" indicates the beginning of the lunar day,                                                                                                                                                                    was established during the reign of Louis XIV, also known
           10 3/4                                    11 1/2          1                 2 1/2     3 1/2         8         6         7 3/4  representing the Moon's age. Thus, the color patches encompass                                                                                                                                                                     as the Sun King. This calendar commemorates significant
                                                                                                                                          the entire date range, and the central red region represents the                                                                                                                                                                   events during his first reign, such as the War of Devolution
9 8 8 1/4 8 8 3/4 9 1/4 9 1/4 9 1/2                       9 3/4 10 10 11 12 12 1/2 1                              3 1/4 4                 15th and 30th days.                                                                                                                                                                                                                in 1667 and 1668, as well as his military campaigns in Flan-
                                                1/2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ders (Figure 2.29).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Louis XIV's reign lasted for an impressive 72 years and 110
8 7 7 7 1/4 7 3/4 8 1/4 8 1/4 8 1/2 8 1/2 8 3/4 9 9 10 11 16 1/2 0 1 1/2 2 1/2 3 1/4                                     3 3 1/2 4 3/4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       days, making it the longest of any confirmed king in his-
                           1/2                       1/2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tory. Although Louis XIV's France typified Europe's period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of absolutism, the King surrounded himself with a diverse
           6 3/4 7 1/4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       range of notable political, military, and cultural leaders, in-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cluding Bossuet, Colbert, Le Brun, Le Nôtre, Lully, Mazarin,
CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Calendar of Mary)                                                                                                                                                                       9                                          45                                                                                                                  Molière, Racine, Turenne, and Vauban.
The CALENDARIVM MARIANVM (Figure 2.19), popularly                                                                                                                                                          78
known as the Marian Calendar, may be viewed on the west                                                                                                                                                                                                                III
side wall. Based on the solar calendar, this calendar high-                                                                                  VIII                                                                                                                            IV
lights the festivals and holidays connected to the Virgin                                                                                 VI VII                                                                                                                                V VI
Mary. Father Bonfa has meticulously depicted these cele-                                                                                  6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6                                                                                     6 5 4 3 2 1 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
brations on the first step of the wall, where the sunlight's
reflection allows us to anticipate their occurrence.                                                                                                                                                             10 11                                  3                                            Nuptiae                      Marriage (1660)                            limbur               Limburg (1667?)
The CALENDARIVM MARIANVM presents several notable                                                                                                                                                                                                12                                      June Traj.(ectum                         Maastricht (1673?)                         Tornaci              Tournai (1667?)
holidays, including:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     July Mosae)
· Visitatio (Visitation) on July 2nd                                                                                                                                                                                    15 30                                                                                                     plug                                       Duaci                Douai (1667?)
· Assumptio (Assumption) on August 15th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              expugnation                                                             Cortr.               Kortrijk (1667?)
· Nativitas (Nativity) on September 8th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Gravelines (1664?)                         2Vesontionis Exp.    Second capture of Besançon
· Annuntiatio (Annunciation) on March 25th                                                                                                                                                                              14 29                                                                                                                                                                     Solemn entry of the king in 1674
· Purificatio (Purification) on February 2nd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      baptism of the king (1643)                 Trajectum Liberatum  Liberation of Maastricht (1676?)
· Praesentatio (Presentation) on November 21st                                                                                                                                                                          13 28                                                                                                     Capture of Lille (1667)                    Graiaci Exp 2        2nd capture of Gray (1674?)
· Conce immaculata (Immaculate Conception) on De-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dauphin's birthday (Laws XIV 5 Sept 1638)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12 27                                                                May     Gravelingae                  Capture of Philipsburg, year 1644
    cember 8th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             August
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        11 26                                                                        Batismum regium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            April    Insulae Expugnato
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10 25                                                            September   Dies natalis delph
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Philiburgi Expug. year 1644
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9 24

                                                                                                                                          IX 8 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5 20

                                                                                                                                          X 4 19                                                                                                           II
                                                                                                                                                                                                               3 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 17

                                                                                                                                                                               1 16                                                                                                       March      Melianoe Deditio: year 1674  Reddition of Mulhouse (29 oct 1674)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         October     Voerdenis Liberatum          Liberation of Voerden (11 Oct 1672)
                                                                                                                                          XI XII I

                                                                                                                                          Reconstruction of HOROLOG' NOVU IN QUO LUNAE PER SOLEM                                                                                         February    Dies natalis delph           birthday of the Dauphin (the great; 1661)  I Graiaci exp I vesontionis 1st of Gray and Besançon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           February  Doloe Exp.                   Capture of Dole (February 14, 1668)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           November  Pacis promulg.               Peace Proclamation
                                                                                                                                           Università Iuav di Venezia                                                                                        The Signs of The Zodiac -                                                                                                                                                                                                           The Invisible Gem of Horloge So-
                                                                                                                                           Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     laire Du Lycée Stendhal
                                                                                                                                           engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                           System of Declinations of The Sun                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Grenoble (FR)
                                                                                                                                           Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa
                                                                                                                                           Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot                                                                   The System of Declinations of The Sun is the angular distance between the plane of the
                                                                                                                                           Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042                                                                            equator and the Sun's declinations, representing the sun's path concerning the earth's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       system. In sundials, two specific dates are always shown. Those are June 21 (summer
                                                                                                                                       The sun rises The sun goes down                                                                                 solstice) and December 21 (winter solstice). These dates coincide with the Sun's position
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       at its highest and lowest points above the equator, resulting in maximum and minimum
                                                                                                                                       June 22 - Sum-                                                          Entry into Cancer                       daylight hours. The Sun's declination undergoes variation throughout the day, yielding
                                                                                                                                        mer Solstice                                                                                                   a curvilinear trajectory traced by the luminous point from sunrise to sunset, exhibiting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a hyperbolic branch. The hyperbolic line for the summer solstice (June 22) is closest to
                                                                                                                                   May 21 - Gemini                                                               Leo - July 23                         the window; that winter (December 23) is the furthest. The bright spot within a year is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       always between these two curves. The representation of the progression of time in the
                                                                                                                                   April 21 - Taurus                                                           Virgo - August 23                       celestial sphere involves the utilization of the Zodiac. The Zodiac encompasses a belt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       defined by two parallel circles, positioned at an angular separation of 8°30' on either side
                                                                                                                                   March 21 - Aries                                                    Libra - September 23                            of the ecliptic.

                                                                                                                                       February 19 -                                                           Scorpio - October 23

                                                                                                                                           Pisces

                                                                                                                                       January 20 -                                                            Sagittarius - Novem-

                                                                                                                                       Aquarius                                                                         ber 22

                                                                                                                                       December 21 -                                                           Entering Capricorn
                                                                                                                                       Winter Solstice

                                                                                                                                       The table of Zodiac throughout a year.

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zenith

                                                                                                                                                                                              22 July  a

                                                                                                                                                                         23 August                             21 June

                                                                                                                                                                cb                                                      ` T.g

                                                                                                                                       North           22 September    eridian                                                       TL.g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Orthogonal projections of the system of dec-
                                                                                                                                       Pole                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           linations of the Sun based on the the Sun's
                                                                                                                                                    d                                                                                           South                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            declination in a year.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20 May                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M.G

                                                                                                                                                    22 October                                                          _

                                                                                                                                                                A.E

                                                                                                                                   North            e                              Horizon                                            20 April
                                                                                                                                            TL.a
                                                                                                                                               T.a  22 November               g 20 January h                        ^

                                                                                                                                                       f                                                                       20 March                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _ - c           T.a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ` - b
                                                                                                                                                                 21 December                                      i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M.G
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19 February

                                                                                                                                   The Conic Surface of Light and The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M.G M.G
                                                                                                                                   Projection of The Sun's Movement.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T.a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ` - b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _ - c

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^ - d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i - e

                                                                                                                                   The reconstruction of the sun's trajecto-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M.G      h - f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T.g

                                                                                                                                   ry necessitates using the conic surface

                                                                                                                                   of light, which can be conceptualized

                                                                                                                                   as following the definition proposed

                                                                                                                                   by Riccardo Migliati. The intersection

                                                                                                                                   of these conical surfaces with interior                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The projection of solar cone of the system of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 declinations on the interior space during the
Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg  spaces of varying shapes gives rise to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        period spanning from March 20 to 22.

                                                                                                                                   the zodiac or month lines observed on

                                                                                                                                   sundials. Consequently, creating a sun-

                                                                                                                                   dial on any surface poses a geometric

                                                                                                                                   projection challenge.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The Projection of The System of Decli-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nations of The Sun - The Signs of The
                                                                                                                                   The Existing Condition of The Sundial                                                                                                                                                                                      Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg  Zodiac of Celstial Sphere on The Inte-
                                                                                                                                   in Grenoble                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rior Space

                                                                                                                                   Gemini:          Taurus:                                            Aries:                   Pisces:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          The System of Declinations of the Sun
                                                                                                                                   May 21           April 21                                           March 21                 February 19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      can be identified and represented on a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 celestial sphere by depicting orbitals re-
                                                                                                                                   Aquarius: Sagittarius: Leo:                                                                  Virgo:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sembling light cones. This system com-
                                                                                                                                   January 20 November July 23                                                                  August 23                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        prises a collection of cones that share
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a common vertex and axis of rotation,
                                                                                                                                                  22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             horizontally inclined at an angle of 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 with respect to the north. The value of 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 corresponds to the latitude of Grenoble,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 specifically  = 45.1885°.

                                                                                                                                   Libra:           Scorpio: Capricorn: Cancer:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The plane traversing the equator is des-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ignated as the 0° point to establish a ref-
                                                                                                                                   September October 23 December 21 June 22                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      erence origin. Subsequently, the cones
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 extend along arcs inclined to the equa-
                                                                                                                                   23                                           Winter Sol- Summer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tor at various angles, namely +/-11.4°,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +/-20°, and +/-23°27' (representing the
                                                                                                                                                                                stice                                           Solstice                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tropical/solstice positions), as outlined
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in the Figure. These angles correspond
                                                                                                                                   To organize a perpetual Gregorian so-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to the relatively constant declination
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 values of the Sun at specific locations
                                                                                                                                   lar calendar using the Meridian, Father                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       throughout the year.

                                                                                                                                   Bonfa drew a network of lines painted in

                                                                                                                                   "mud of Paris," which indicate the sun's

                                                                                                                                   position in the signs of the Zodiac.

                                                                                                                                   · The Symbol of each Zodiac is placed
                                                                                                                                       on the line's starting point where the
                                                                                                                                       sun could illuminate that sign.

                                                                                                                                   Legend :                                                                                                                                                                                                          Level 1                                                                                                                                     Reflective Sundials Concept: The Reflection
                                                                                                                                   P - Pole North                                                                                                                                                                                                    Level 0                                                                                                                                     of Solar Rays on A Circular Mirror
                                                                                                                                   Z - Zenit
                                                                                                                                   N.G - North Geography                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The intersection between the system of decli-
                                                                                                                                   M - Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nations of the sun with the staircase.
                                                                                                                                   M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Orange lines: System of declinations of the
                                                                                                                                   H - Horizon - Equator                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sun generated by the ideal celestial.
                                                                                                                                   E - Equinox                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Orange Surface: The conic surface of light
                                                                                                                                   L - Limits of the sundial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     within a year.
                                                                                                                                   T.L  - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
                                                                                                                                   T.L  - Lunar Tropic of Cancer
                                                                                                                                   T.  - Tropic of Capricorn (Dec 21)
                                                                                                                                   T.  - Tropic of Cancer (June 21)
                                                                                                                                    -  - Aquarius - Sagittarius (Jan 20 - Nov
                                                                                                                                   22)
                                                                                                                                    -  - Pisces - Scorpio (Feb 19 - Oct 22)
                                                                                                                                    -  - Aries - Libra (Equinoxes Mar 20 -
                                                                                                                                   Sep 22)
                                                                                                                                    -  - Taurus - Virgo (Apr. 20 - Aug. 23)
                                                                                                                                    -  - Gemini - Leo (May 20 - July 22)
                                                                                                                                   PE - Plane of the Ecliptic
                                                                                                                                   A.E - Axis of the Ecliptic
                                                                                                                                    - Aries Point
                                                                                                                                   S - Limit of polar stars always visible in the
                                                                                                                                   northern hemisphere
                                                                                                                                   Orange lines: Babylonian hours generated
                                                                                                                                   by the ideal celestial.
                                                                                                                                   Yellow dash lines: Babylonian hours from
                                                                                                                                   dawn to early afternoon that found on the
                                                                                                                                   staircase.
       Università Iuav di Venezia                                             French Hours Dials                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Invisible Gem of Horloge So-
       Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            laire Du Lycée Stendhal
       engineering-architecture 2022-2023                               The astronomical hour system is also known as the French hour system (civil                                                                                                                                                                             Grenoble (FR)
       Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                         time or equal time). It tells the solar time as we are using today on mod-
       Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot                        ern watches. The term "Astronomical" originates from the application of the
       Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042                                 hourly notation similar to the notation used by astronomers. It provides
                                                                        twenty-four fixed equal periods of the day and is divided into two cycles ev-
The Existing Condition of The Sundial                                   ery twelve hours. The French hour system consists of 24 hours a day starting
in Grenoble                                                             at midnight, used in France around 1500. They are called the French hour
                                                                        system to distinguish it from the Italic time adopted by Italy and other coun-
The set of hour markers are curves                                      tries.
painted "mixto colore", i.e. in a dark gray
or "Paris mud", according to Abbé Gat-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Orthogonal Projections of French Hours Di-
tel. Thinner lines indicate the half-hours                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          als.
make obtaining more precision in read-
ing the time possible. The numbering is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M.G
in Roman numerals (VIII, IX, X, XI, XII for
the morning hours and I, II, III, IV for the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I   2
evening hours) and Arabic. These lines                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M.G            1 3 12
represent the direction of movement of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M.G
the sun's bright spot on the same day,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            XII
especially during the winter and sum-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3             12
mer solstices, as well as at the time of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I
the equinoxes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4 M.G             11

The west wall of the first step shows                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
the morning time; The vertical wall to
the east of the second step represents                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           III IV 9
evening time. The small wall in the mid-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               II
dle shows contrasting solar time/moon
time charts and other spreadsheets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X IX VIII

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M.G XII XI

The inscription decorated Roman numerals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The projection of the French hour system
inside the reflective sundial in Grenoble.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of the celestial sphere on the interior space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    during the period 12:00 in a day.
                                                                   M.G
                                                                                                                                                                 Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg
The French time lines result from the inter-
section of light planes with the staircase.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The Projection of The Hour Angle of
Black lines: French hours generated by the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Celestial Sphere on The Interior Space
ideal celestial.
Gray surface: The Plane of light within a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           An ideal celestial sphere has been con-
day.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                structed, specifically designed to corre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    spond to the latitude of Grenoble. This
Reflective Sundials Concept: The Reflection of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      celestial sphere incorporates a network
Solar Rays on A Circular Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     of hour lines known as French hour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lines, formed through the intersection
Legend :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of the celestial sphere and planes of
P - Pole North                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      light. These planes of light are generat-
Z - Zenit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ed by the Sun and the North Star's axis.
N.G - North Geography                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               It is important to note that the tilt angle
M - Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of the north pole axis varies following
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the specific latitude of the sundial's lo-
H - Horizon - Equator                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cation. In the case of Grenoble, this tilt
E - Equinox                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         angle is set at 45.1885°, aligning with its
L - Limits of the sundial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           corresponding latitude ( = 45.1885°).
T.L - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The celestial sphere's astronomical hour
S - Limit of polar stars always visible in the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      system is identified by applying a funda-
northern hemisphere                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mental astronomical parameter, known
Black lines: French hours generated by the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as the Sun's hour angle (H), as depicted
ideal celestial.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in. The hour angle is conventionally mea-
Black dash lines: French hours found on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sured from 0 degrees to +180 degrees
the staircase.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in the westward direction and from 0 to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -180 degrees in the eastward direction.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A value of 0 degrees corresponds to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sun's position on the meridian, while
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the angle at dawn or sunset is referred
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    to as the semi-diurnal arc H0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The relationship between the semi-diur-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nal arc H0 and the geographical latitude
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    () and the declination of the Sun () is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    governed by the following equation:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cos H0 = -tan  * tan 

                                                                                                                                                        Level 1                                                                                                                                     To establish a correspondence between
                                                                                                                                                        Level 0                                                                                                                                     angular variations in the hour angle H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and the passage of time, it is postulat-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ed that a 15-degree corresponds to one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hour, given that the Sun completes its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    360-degree trajectory over 24 hours.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Therefore, these light planes are then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rotated around the north pole in mul-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tiples of 15 degrees, starting from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    meridian plane that represents 12:00.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The intersections formed between the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    celestial sphere, and these light planes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    serve as the hour lines within the reflec-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tive sundial.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Sun's hour angle H. It is measured along
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the Celestial Equator from its culmination in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the south.
       Università Iuav di Venezia                        Babylonian Hours Dials                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The Invisible Gem of Horloge So-
       Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      laire Du Lycée Stendhal
       engineering-architecture 2022-2023             The Babylonian time system was standard in Europe around 1300, except                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Grenoble (FR)
       Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa       in some Mediterranean regions where the Italian time system was normal.
       Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot      A millennium ago, they believed that midnight was not a specific hour and
       Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               there was no need to begin counting at such an ambiguous moment. In-
                                                      stead, two other instants are much better candidates for serving as time or-
The existing condition of the sundial in              igins, namely sunrise and sunset. These choices led to the Babylonian (or
Grenoble                                              Babylonic) hours system: Babylonian hours are equinoctial hours counted
The Babylonian and French knowledge                   from sunrise.
of time provided a way to find sun-
rise and sunset times. They tell us how               Taking up the old habit of the Babylonians, counting the hours begins at
long the sun has risen and calculate                  sunrise. The interval between two sunrises is divided into 24 equal hours,
how many more hours it will last. In-                 numbered here in Arabic numerals. They are not typical dial information.
side Grenoble's reflecting sundial, these             Indeed, the Babylonian time system is usually found with hour parameters
lines, painted yellow and numbered                    dramatically boosted by sophisticated time grids. Is that why the Grenoble
with Arabic numerals, represent the                   dial designer decided to display Babylon's time?
Babylonian hour since sunrise. It indi-
cates the elapsed time since sunrise ac-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Orthogonal projections of the system of dec-
cording to the Babylonian timekeeping                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         linations of the Sun based on the the Sun's
tradition. Furthermore, four dotted lines                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     declination in a year.
on ceiling 2 begin with dawn (INITIVM
AURORAE), dusk (OCCASVS SOLIS), sun-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M.G
rise (ORTVS SOLIS), and the conclusion
of sunset (FINISH CREPVSCVLI) for cer-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
tain times of the year. The Babylonian
time system lines are straight lines pro-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7            9 10 8 9 8
duced using a procedure similar to that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6                                            M.G 7
of ancient times. J. de Rey Pailhade es-
tablished a reconciliation of Babylonian                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M.G                    6 8M.G 8 7
time and French time for the summer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6                                                       6
solstice, equinox, and winter solstice
for the latitude of Grenoble. It is easier                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5     7
to establish since the Babylonian and
French hours are equal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5

Fresco Inscription:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
Inscription: "GALLE NIGRAM ROMANE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        63
RVBRAM FVLVAM QVE BABELE HIC TIBI PIN-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
  GO HORAM MIXTO DO SIGNA COLORE"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
"I paint you here the French hour in black,
Roman in red, Babylonian in yellow. I give                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2  1
you the signs of the zodiac in mixed colors."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
Reflective Sundials Concept: The Reflection
of Solar Rays on A Circular Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M.G                     4

Legend :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg  The projection of solar cone of the system of
P - Pole North                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                declinations on the interior space during the
Z - Zenit                                                                                                                           Level 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   period spanning from March 20 to 22.
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Babylonians Hour System on A Ce-
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lestial Sphere
H - Horizon - Equator
E - Equinox                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   This is how we identify The Babylonians
L - Limits of the sundial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hour System on a celestial sphere. Be-
T.L - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cause Babylonian hours are equinoctial
S - Limit of polar stars always visible in the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hours counted from sunrise, the Bab-
northern hemisphere                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ylonian hour is 0:00 at sunrise. Babylo-
Yellow lines: Babylonian hours were gener-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nian dials provide essential information
ated by the ideal celestial.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  regarding the elapsed number of hours
Yellow dash lines: Babylonian hours found                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     since dawn. Consequently, the Babylo-
on the staircase                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nian Hour System comprises 24 distinct
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              great circles, with the first circle repre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              senting the horizon, intersecting the ce-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lestial equator.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Starting from the horizon, they create
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              24 circles on the celestial sphere, always
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              visible in the northern hemisphere.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              These circles, in reality, are generated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              through the rotation of the horizon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              plane around the polar axis in incre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ments of 15 degrees. The lines of this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              system are caused by planes with a ro-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tation angle of 15 degrees and an incli-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nation of 45.1885 degrees concerning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the north pole axis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The projection of the Babylonian Hour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              System, originating from the celestial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sphere, onto the interior space of a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sundial has been meticulously recre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ated to align with Grenoble's latitude.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              As mentioned above, Babylonian hour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lines inside the sundial in Grenoble are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              established through the intersection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              between the interior surfaces of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sundial and the rotating plane's surface
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              starting from the horizon plane.

                                                                                                                                    Level 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The intersection between Babylonians'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Time planes with the staircase and the start-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ing 0:00 at sunrise on the horizon.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yellow lines: Babylonian hours were gener-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ated by the ideal celestial.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yellow surface: 24 planes starting at 0:00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              when sunrise on the horizon.
       Università Iuav di Venezia                     Roman - Italian Hours Dials                                                                                                                                                                                         The Invisible Gem of Horloge So-
       Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  laire Du Lycée Stendhal
       engineering-architecture 2022-2023             It was not the hours of ancient Rome used for the Christian liturgy, which                                                                                                                                                                      Grenoble (FR)
       Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa       varied according to the seasons. Italian hours are equinoctial hours counted
       Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot      from the last sunset. The Italian hour is 0:00 at sunset. The interval between
       Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               two sunsets is divided into 24 equal hours in-scribed in Arabic numerals on
                                                      the dial and called Italic hours in treatises on gnomonic (the art of building
The existing condition of the sundial in              sundials). In the mid-1300s, the Italian time system was used. It specifies the
Grenoble                                              number of hours until sunset (Hour of Vespers): for the benefit of public life,
In the context of the sundial in Greno-               knowing the hours of light that remained to end a working day was essential
ble, Father Bonfa implemented a dis-                  so that one would not be left in the dark outside the town or on the streets,
tinct inscription, "ROMANE RVBRAM"                    which were not very pleasant at the time. The Italian time system was wide-
(red for Rome) , symbolizing the utili-               spread, particularly in the peninsula and Catholic nations, and it was used
zation of Italian hour lines. These hour              until the second half of the eighteenth century when the modern system
lines exhibit a symmetrical construc-                 superseded it. Today, it is mainly preserved in the repair of antique dials.
tion, commencing from sunset. They are
also great circles obtained by rotating                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Orthogonal Projections of Italian Hours Di-
the horizon plane around the polar axis.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  als
The coexistence of the Italian and Baby-
lonian hour systems within the sundial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M.G
comple-ments one another, enabling
the determination of post-sunset and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19                      19 20 18
post-sunrise hour counts. Remarkably,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M.G
the sundial's accuracy remains consis-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M.G  18                                    15
tent throughout the year, irrespective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16 17 17 16       14
of the varying duration of daylight be-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18 M.G
tween winter and summer seasons. This                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
temporal reliabil-ity is achieved by em-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21      1918 22 19 16
ploying the Italian and Babylonian hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
systems. The number of Baby-lonian
hours (n) coincides with the number                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20                                                  14
of Italian hours (n + 12) at the equator,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M.G           18 17 16 15
establish-ing a fundamental correlation
between the two systems. Reading time                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18
in the sundial is facilitated using three
different temporal systems: French, Bab-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19
ylonian, and Italian hours. These systems
enable straightforward calculations of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18
significant material events :
· Sunrise: (F -- B),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The Italian Time Lines Results from the In-
· Sunset of the previous day: (24 -- [I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tersection of the Planes Surface with The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Staircase at 18:00 (6:00 Babylonian Time).
    -- F]),
· The time during which the Sun is                                                                                                     Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg  The projection of the Italian hour sys-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tem of the celestial sphere on the inte-
    above the horizon: (24 -- [I -- B])                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rior space
F: French hour
B: Babylonian hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        This is how we identify the Italian time
I: Italian hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           system on a celestial sphere. The Italian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          time system is obtained by flipping the
Reflective Sundials Concept: The Reflection of                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Babylon dial 180° along the x-axis: this
Solar Rays on A Circular Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dial divides the day into 24 sections, be-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ginning with the numbering at sunset.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hours are usually displayed by Roman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          numerals (although, in this case, Ara-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bic numerals), and the hour mark-ers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          running around the dial terminate with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          XXIV hour on the horizon. We recreated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an ideal celestial sphere associated with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Greonle's latitude. They create 24 semi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          circles from the hori-zon, always visi-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ble in the northern hemisphere. These
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          curves are huge circles, and they are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          formed by rotating the horizon plane in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15° increments around the polar axis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          If multiples of 15° rotate the meridian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          plane, it cuts the sphere at the Italian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hour lines.

Legend :                                                                                                                               Level 1
P - Pole North
Z - Zenit                                                                                                                              Level 0
N.G - North Geography
M - Mirror                                                                                                                                                                 The intersection between Italian Time
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)                                                                                                                                            planes with the staircase and the starting
H - Horizon - Equator                                                                                                                                                      0:00 at sunset on the horizon.
E - Equinox                                                                                                                                                                Red lines: Italian hours were generated by
L - Limits of the sundial                                                                                                                                                  the ideal celestial.
T.L - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn                                                                                                                                            Red surface: 24 planes starting at 0:00
                                                                                                                                                                           when sunset is on the horizon.
S - Limit of polar stars always visible in the
northern hemisphere

Red lines: Italian hours were generated by
the ideal celestial.

Red dash lines: Italian hours found on the
staircase.
Università Iuav di Venezia                                                                                                      Twelve Astrological Houses -                                                                                                                                                                                                 The Invisible Gem of Horloge So-
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            laire Du Lycée Stendhal
engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                   The Celestial Houses                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Grenoble (FR)
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot                                                                                      The Twelve Astrological Houses, also known as the Celestial Houses, repre-
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042                                                                                               sent a fundamental concept within astrology. These houses are mathemat-
                                                                                                                               ical divisions, each spanning 30 degrees. The celestial sphere, with its unit
The existing condition of the sundial in                                                                                       circle of 360 degrees, symbolically represents the expansive heavens. Astrol-
Grenoble                                                                                                                       ogers construct horoscopes by considering the positions of celestial bodies,
                                                                                                                               primarily in two distinct contexts. Firstly, they analyze the locations of these
The sundial in Grenoble, as previous-                                                                                          bodies within the various signs of the Zodiac, often referred to as the Celes-
ly described by Father Bonfa, features                                                                                         tial Houses of the Sun. Secondly, they observe the positions of celestial bod-
inscriptions indicating the positions of                                                                                       ies with the horizon of a specific geographic location, known as the celestial
the celestial Houses along the walls and                                                                                       Houses relative to the horizon.
ceilings of the staircase.
                                                                                                                               During the late 17th century, astrology remained a subject of study and ex-
These inscriptions provide valuable in-                                                                                        ploration. As previously mentioned, the author of The Sundial referred to
formation regarding the alignment of                                                                                           the positions of the zodiac signs. In astrology, the celestial sphere is divided
the celestial Houses with the Grenoble                                                                                         into twelve distinct houses, each corresponding to a two-hour solar time
horizon at specific times throughout the                                                                                       interval.
day. We read the following inscriptions
on Plate 2, West wall, on the left DOMVS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Orthogonal Projections of Twelve Astrolog-
COELI nearly 8 am going up.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ical Houses
XII. DOMVS COELES between 9 and 10
am;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M.G
XI. DOMVS COELESTIS right from 10
o'clock.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M.G
On Plate 1, on the ceiling:
X. DOMVS COELESTIS West of the Merid-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M.G IX.DOM X.DOMVS C VS OE C L O E E S L T E IS STIS TIS       M.G
ian;
IX. DOMVS COELESTIS to the East.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ELESTIS         COELES
Take Plate 5, East wall of the second                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OMVS CO II.DOMVS          LESTIS
ramp; one sees:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIIII.D  V VS I COE
VIII. DOMVS COELESTIS East of 2 p.m.;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           II.DOM                                              OELESTIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            XI.DOMV T S IS C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OELES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MVS E C LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            XII.DO     VS CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M.G
VIIII. DOMVS COELESTIS.

House Numbers                           Celestial House in
                                               Hours

I.Maison de la vie                      between 4 and 6 a.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The Celestial Houses Lines Results from the
II.Maison de richesses                  between 2 and 4 a.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Intersection of the Planes Surface with The
III.Maison de frères                    between midnight and 2 a.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Staircase during 12:00 in a day.
IV.Maison de parents                    between 10 p.m. and mid-
                                        night                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The Projection of The Celestial Hous-
V.Maison de enfants                     between 8 and 10 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                es in Celestial Sphere on The Interior
VI.Maison de santé                      between 6 and 8 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Space
VII.Maison de mariage                   between 4 and 6 p.m.
VIII.Maison de mort                     between 2 and 4 p.m.
IX.Maison de piété                      between noon and 2 a.m.
                                        evening
X.Maison de offices                     between 10 a.m. and noon
XI.Maison de amis                       between 8 a.m. and 10 a.m.
XII.Maison de bienfails                 between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Xref J:\2018\18-019_Bitexco Sales Gallery\B. DESIGN\B200 CAD\003-BASIC DESIGN SUBMISSION\A-CAD FILES\00_General\X-ref\Form-A1.dwg

These inscriptions provide an explicit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The projection of the Celestial Houses
delineation of the celestial Houses asso-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    onto the interior space can be achieved
ciated with the sundial in Grenoble. J. de                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   by delineating their presence on a celes-
Rey Pailhade further emphasizes the im-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tial sphere. This method allows for iden-
portance of dividing the sky according                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tifying and understanding the Celestial
to a table of the positions of the celes-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Houses within the context of astrology.
tial Houses. By employing this table, de-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The generation of these houses involves
termining the House in which the Sun                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         using a series of planes, each character-
resides becomes a straightforward pro-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ized by a rotation angle of 30° and a ro-
cess. It is simple to use this table. When                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tation axis aligned towards the north.
the sun reaches a point on the Meridi-
an, the celestial House in which it is read                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  During the late 17th century, astrology
immediately. When the Sun is down,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           remained a subject of study and instruc-
we reference the Sundial's well-regulat-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tion. The lines of this system arise from
ed clock, then look in the chart to see                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a bundle of planes with an angle of 30
which House the Sun is in.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   degrees and the axis of rotation towards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the North Star, i.e., north. They are tilted
                                        Zenith                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               relative to the horizon 45.1885 degrees,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             equal to Grenoble's latitude  = 45.1885
                           TIS 11                        Equator                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             degrees. By employing this method, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             projection of the Celestial Houses onto
        VIIII.DOM    COELES     MVS COELESTIS   10       23.26°                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the celestial sphere enables a compre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             hensive understanding of their spatial
                 VS 12                          23.26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        arrangement within the interior space.
                                                      °

North                      IX.DO

Pole             OELESTIS                     LESTIS COE 9                                                              South

VIII.D OMVS C                              OMVS 30°

         1 ELESTIS                      X.D
                      O                                                  OELESTIS
             MVS C
      VII.DO                                       OMVS C 8

                                                         XI.D
                 45.19°

                                                                                                              Ecliptic
              2                                                 OELESTIS
North                                                  MVS C
                                                XII.DO

                                                             7

                 3 Horizon

                                                      6
                             4

                                         5

Astronomic Representation of The Celestial
Houses on The Celestial Sphere.

Legend :                                                                                                                                                                                                         Level 1                                                                                                                                     Reflective Sundials Concept: The Reflection
P - Pole North                                                                                                                                                                                                   Level 0                                                                                                                                     of Solar Rays on A Circular Mirror
Z - Zenit
N.G - North Geography                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The intersection between The Celestial
M - Mirror                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Houses' planes and the staircase.
M.G - Local Meridian (Grenoble)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Blue lines: Lines of Astrological Houses
H - Horizon - Equator                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        generated by the ideal celestial.
E - Equinox                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Blue surface: 12 planes within a day (rota-
L - Limits of the sundial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tion angle of 30°).
T.L  - Lunar Tropic of Capricorn
PE - Plane of the Ecliptic
A.E - Axis of the Ecliptic
 - Aries Point
S - Limit of polar stars always visible in the
northern hemisphere
Blue lines: Twelve astrological houses gen-
erated by the ideal celestial.
Blue dash lines: Twelve astrological houses
found on the staircase.
       Università Iuav di Venezia                      Comparison of the Ideal Sphere                                                            The Invisible Gem of Horloge So-
       Master's Degrees in Architecture and building   Model to the 3D Survey Model                                                                           laire Du Lycée Stendhal
       engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                                                    Grenoble (FR)
       Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa       The accuracy of complex information systems within the reflecting sundial at
       Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot      Stendhal High School in Grenoble was investigated and evaluated through a com-           Photos of guests visiting Grenoble's
       Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               parative analysis of the photogrammetry-based 3D reconstruction and the inter-           reflected sundial on March 26th, 2022.
                                                      section lines obtained from projecting the celestial sphere into the interior space.     (Photo courtesy of Ho Trong Nhan)
By overlaying these two components,                   This examination allows for an in-depth assessment of the study's precision. The         However, it is essential to note that this
precise and congruent results are ob-                 3D model represents the current state of the reflecting sundial. At the same time,       thesis only provides an imperfect sum-
tained. The figure below illustrates a de-            the projection of the celestial sphere into the interior space signifies the envisioned  mary considering the depth of knowl-
tailed comparison between the sundi-                  ideal outcome envisioned by Father Bonfa.                                                edge surrounding this historical site.
al's current condition and the ideal lines                                                                                                     Numerous untold stories exist regard-
made by the 3d stimulation. A remark-                                                                                                          ing the formation of the spreadsheets,
able relative precision exists between                                                                                                         which were implicitly recognized for
the lines drawn by Father Bonfa in the                                                                                                         their correctness throughout the re-
17th century and the lines derived from                                                                                                        search. Throughout the study, the thesis
the 3D model. Nevertheless, it is essen-                                                                                                       implicitly recognized their correctness.
tial to acknowledge the limitations im-                                                                                                        Furthermore, the historical stories be-
posed by the existing condition of the                                                                                                         hind Bonfa's father's creation of this
sundial in Grenoble. Due to the upward                                                                                                         masterwork are an area that requires
geometry of the stairway, certain areas                                                                                                        further investigation. It is believed that
of the ceiling became inaccessible for                                                                                                         it will serve as a source of inspiration for
the beams of light at specific times of                                                                                                        future research and provide a greater
the year, preventing Father Bonfa from                                                                                                         understanding of the guiding concepts
accurately depicting them.                                                                                                                     of its clever and erudite creator.

The precision achieved can be attribut-
ed to Father Bonfa's use of a trial-and-er-
ror approach during the design process.
The edited lines on this wall could still be
visible to the naked eye after a hundred
years in less than 100 square meters.

This demonstrates that the author of
this dial invested his time in calculating
methods. This work is equivalent to an
efficient scientific study, and the author
has always prioritized correctness. This
article proves Jesuit Father Jean Bonfa's
skill in mathematics and dedication.

The 3D reconstruction of the reflective sundial in                                                                                             Level 1
Grenoble.                                                                                                                                      Level 0

Legend :                                                                                                                                        The Reconstruction of The local Celestial
Orange lines: System of declinations of                                                                                                         Sphere.
the sun generated by the ideal celestial.
Orange dash lines: System of declinations
of the sun found on the staircase.
Black lines: French hours generated by the
ideal celestial.
Black dash lines: French hours found on
the staircase.
Yellow lines: Babylonian hours were gen-
erated by the ideal celestial.
Yellow dash lines: Babylonian hours found
on the staircase
Red lines: Italian hours were generated by
the ideal celestial.
Red dash lines: Italian hours found on the
staircase.
Blue lines: Twelve astrological houses
generated by the ideal celestial.
Blue dash lines: Twelve astrological hous-
es found on the staircase.
Università Iuav di Venezia                       The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Gen-                         The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building    erate the Declinations of The Sun Inside the Inner                                                Du Lycée Stendhal
engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                                         Grenoble (FR)
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                       Space of a Reflected Sundial.
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               The System of Declinations of the Sun can be identified by light
                                               cones. The plane at the equator is the 0° point - reference origin. The
                                               other cones inclined to the equator at: 11, 20, and 23 degrees. The
                                               lines of the Sun's declinations inside the reflective sundial are the in-
                                               tersection of the room surfaces with the light cones.
Università Iuav di Venezia                      The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Gener-                         The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building   ate the French Hour System Inside the Inner Space                                                   Du Lycée Stendhal
engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                                          Grenoble (FR)
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                           of a Reflected Sundial.
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               French hour lines, formed through the intersection of the celestial
                                               sphere and planes of light. These light planes are then rotated around
                                               the north pole in multiples of 15 degrees, starting from the meridian
                                               plane that represents 12:00. The astronomical hour lines, also known
                                               as French hours, are established through the intersection between
                                               the interior surfaces and the planes of light.

1   2                                          3   4                                                                   5   6

7   8                                          9   10                                                                  11  12

13  14                                         15  16                                                                  17  18

19  20                                         21  22                                                                  23  24
Università Iuav di Venezia                      The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Gener-                        The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building   ate the Babylonian Hour System Inside the Inner                                                    Du Lycée Stendhal
engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                                         Grenoble (FR)
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                       Space of a Reflected Sundial.
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               Babylonian hours are counted from sunrise. The lines of this system
                                               are caused by planes with a rotation angle of 15 degrees around the
                                               north pole starting from the horizon plane. Babylonian hour lines in-
                                               side the sundial in Grenoble are established through the intersection
                                               between the interior surfaces and the rotating plane's surface.

1   2                                          3   4                                                                  5   6

7   8                                          9   10                                                                 11  12

13  14                                         15  16                                                                 17  18

19  20                                         21  22                                                                 23  24
Università Iuav di Venezia                      The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Gener-                             The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building   ate the Italian Hour System Inside the Inner Space                                                      Du Lycée Stendhal
engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                                              Grenoble (FR)
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                           of a Reflected Sundial.
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               The Italian hours are counted from the last sunset. The lines of this sys-
                                               tem are caused by planes with a rotation angle of 15 degrees around
                                               the north pole starting from the horizon plane. Italian hour lines in-
                                               side the sundial in Grenoble are established through the intersection
                                               between the interior surfaces and the rotating plane's surface.

1   2                                          3   4                                                                       5   6

7   8                                          9   10                                                                      11  12

13  14                                         15  16                                                                      17  18

19  20                                         21  22                                                                      23  24
Università Iuav di Venezia                      The Geometrical Relationship Is Employed to Gener-                      The Invisible Gem of Horloge Solaire
Master's Degrees in Architecture and building   ate the Celestial Houses Inside the Inner Space of a                                             Du Lycée Stendhal
engineering-architecture 2022-2023                                                                                                                       Grenoble (FR)
Supervisor : Professor. Agostino De Rosa                              Reflected Sundial.
Co-Supervisor : Professor. Alessio Bortot
Student : Ho Trong Nhan - 294042               The Twelve Astrological Houses, also known as the Celestial Houses,
                                               represent a fundamental concept within astrology. The projection of
                                               the Celestial Houses onto the interior space can be achieved by de-
                                               lineating their presence on a celestial sphere. The generation of these
                                               houses involves using a series of planes, each characterized by a rota-
                                               tion angle of 30° and a rotation axis aligned towards the north pole.

I                                              II  III                                                                  IV

V                                              VI  VII                                                                  VIII

IX                                             X   XI                                                                   XII
